

=== PDF p1 | printed 1 | images 0 ===
1
Introduction

The gastrointestinal tract has many functions such as digestion, absorption and
excretion as well as the synthesis of many hormones.

The enteric nervous system is present in the gut to control its function and
communicate with the central and peripheral nervous systems.

The gastrointestinal tract by the large foreign antigens that contains share in the
expression of the immune response.
Gastrointestinal symptoms and signs:
- Many of the gastrointestinal consultations are for non-organic symptoms
(functional).
- As 20% of all cancers occur in the gastrointestinal tract, therefore the clinician‘s
main task is to recognize an organic disease among the symptoms, signs and
investigations.
- In developing countries, malnutrition, viral and bacterial infections and parasitic
infestations further add to the picture.
- The physician must sought for 'Alarm' symptoms- Red flag symptoms:

Dysphagia.

Weight loss.

persistent vomiting.

Anorexia.

Hematemesis or melena.
- Patients with these features have a higher possibility of significant gastrointestinal
pathology and should be investigated properly.
Stomatitis:
- It is an inflammation in the mouth from any cause (e,g: ill-fitting dentures).
- Angular stomatitis is inflammation of the corners of the mouth .
Dysphagia: Difficulty of swallowing.
Odynophagia: Painful swallowing.
Dyspepsia:
It is an inexact term used to describe a number of upper abdominal symptoms such
as heartburn, acidity, pain or discomfort, nausea, wind, fullness or belching.


=== PDF p2 | printed 2 | images 0 ===
2
Vomiting:
Vomiting centers are located in the reticular formation in the medulla and are
stimulated by the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ), and by the vagus.
Direct stimulation of these zones also occurs by drugs, motion sickness and
metabolic causes.
Two phases will be experienced by the patient before the actual vomiting :
Nausea: associated with autonomic symptoms such as salivation , pallor , sweating.
Retching: strong , involuntary , unproductive effort of vomiting associated with
contraction of abdominal muscles.
The amount and character of vomiting may suggest the pathology:
- large in amount and projectile may suggest gastric outlet obstruction or upper
intestinal obstruction.
- Feculent vomiting may suggest lower intestinal obstruction.
Causes of vomiting:
-Any Gastrointestinal disease
-Infections ( viral and bacterial)
-CNS diseases
- Increase Intracranial pressure
- Vestibular disease
- Migraine
-Metabolic causes : Chronic renal failure , diabetic Ketoacidosis.
-Drugs : e.g Digoxin.
-Reflex : e.g. Myocardial infarction.
-Psychogenic
-Pregnancy
-Alcohol
Flatulence
This term describes excessive wind.
It is used to indicate belching, abdominal distension, gurgling and the passage of
flatus per rectum.
Among causes of increase gas production are colonic bacterial breakdown of non-
absorbed carbohydrate, high fiber diet , carbonated drinks.


=== PDF p3 | printed 3 | images 0 ===
3
Diarrhea and constipation:
- Common complaint in the community and not necessarily due to organic disease.
Diarrhea:
It can be defined as change of normal bowel habits in the form of
- Increase in frequency.
- Increase in amount.
- Decrease in consistency.
Feces exceeding 200g per day when dietary fiber content is low is considered
diarrhea
- The presence of large volume of watery stool is usually due to organic cause.
- Bloody diarrhea is usually due to a colonic cause.
- The presence of fever and acute diarrhea for several days is usually due to an
infective cause .
- A single episode of diarrhea is usually due to dietary changes or may be
psychogenic.
Constipation:
The diagnosis of constipation is difficult as some individuals thought that they must
open there bowel on daily basis , the presence of hard stool can be considered also a
constipation
Constipation can be defined as the presence of 2 or more of the following:
- Infrequent Stools <3/week.
- Hard Stools >1/4 times of defecation.
- Incomplete evacuation >1/4 times of defecation.
- Straining in >1/4 times of defecation.
- Manual maneuvers as digital evacuation and support of pelvic floor >1/4 times of
defecation.


=== PDF p4 | printed 4 | images 0 ===
4
Abdominal pain:
Pain is stimulated mainly by the stretching of smooth muscle or organ capsules.
Severe acute abdominal pain can be due to a large number of gastrointestinal
conditions, and normally presents as an emergency.
An apparent 'acute abdomen' can occasionally be due to referred pain from the
chest, as in pneumonia or to metabolic causes, such as diabetic ketoacidosis or
porphyria.
Check:
- Intensity, character, duration and frequency of the pain
- Aggravating and relieving factors
- Associated symptoms, including non-gastrointestinal symptoms.
Upper abdominal pain:
Epigastric pain is very common and is often related to food intake.
Although functional dyspepsia is the commonest diagnosis, the symptoms of peptic
ulcer disease can be identical.
Heartburn (a burning pain behind the sternum) is a common symptom of gastro-
esophageal reflux.
Right hypochondrial pain:
may originate from the gall bladder or biliary tract.
Biliary pain can also be epigastric.
Biliary pain is typically intermittent and severe, lasts a few hours and remits
spontaneously to recur weeks or months later.
Hepatic congestion (e.g. in hepatitis or cardiac failure) and sometimes peptic ulcer
disease can present with pain in the right hypochondrium.
Chronic, persistent or constant pain in the right (or left) hypochondrium in a well-
looking patient is a frequent functional symptom.
Lower abdominal pain:
Pain in the left iliac fossa may be colonic in origin (e.g. acute diverticulitis) but
chronic pain is most commonly associated with functional bowel disorders.
Lower abdominal pain in women occurs in a number of gynaecological disorders and
the differentiation from GI disease is important , but may be difficult.
Pain in the right iliac fossa may be due to acute appendicitis or ilececal disease, but
may also be functional
Abdominal wall pain:
Persistent abdominal pain with localized tenderness, which is not relieved by tensing
the abdominal muscles.


=== PDF p5 | printed 5 | images 0 ===
5
Anorexia and weight loss
Anorexia describes reduced appetite.
It is common in systemic disease and may be seen in psychiatric disorders.
Anorexia often accompanies cancer but is usually a late symptom and not of
diagnostic help.
Weight loss is almost always due to reduced food intake and is a frequent
accompaniment of gastrointestinal diseases.
Weight loss in malabsorption disorders is primarily due to anorexia.
Weight loss with a normal or increased dietary intake may occur with
hyperthyroidism and other catabolic states.
Weight loss should always be assessed objectively as patients' impressions are
unreliable.
Gastrointestinal (GIT) bleeding:
It presents with one of the followings:
Hematemesis (the vomiting of blood)
Melena (the passage of black tarry stools)

It can occur with bleeding from any lesion proximal to the right colon.

It needs more than 50 ml blood .

The black color due to blood altered by passage through the gut.

Following a bleed from the upper G I tract, unaltered blood can appear per
rectum, but the bleeding must be massive and is almost always accompanied by
shock.

The passage of dark blood and clots without shock is always due to lower GI
bleeding.
Hematochezia :
It is bright red or maroon rectal bleeding.
It usually occurs with lesion distal to the ligament of Treitz ( at junction between
duodenum and jejunum) but it can occur with massive upper GIT bleeding with rapid
transit time.


=== PDF p6 | printed 6 | images 0 ===
6
Investigations
Routine haematology and biochemistry. followed by endoscopy and radiology, are
the principal investigations.
Laboratory
Stool examination is useful to confirm a patient's complaint (e.g. passing of blood or
Steatorrhea).
Fecal occult blood test: Can detect blood in stool that is not visibly apparent
The new Fecal Immunochemical test (FIT) is more accurate and have fewer false
positive tests
Fecal calprotectin: when elevated in stool , it indicates intestinal inflammation ,
calprotectin increase is seen with inflammatory bowel disease
Tumour markers of the gastrointestinal tract include CEA for colon cancer, CA 19-9
for pancreatic cancer, also AFP for hepatocellular cancer
The Endoscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)
It is the investigation of choice for upper GI disorders with the possibility of therapy
and mucosal biopsy.
Findings include reflux esophagitis, gastritis, ulcers and cancer
Therapeutic EGD is used to treat upper GI haemorrhage and both benign and
malignant obstruction.
Relative contraindications include severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, a
recent myocardial infarction.
Sigmoidoscopy :
Can be considered as part of the routine hospital examination in cases of diarrhea
and in patients with lower abdominal symptoms such as a change in bowel habit or
rectal bleeding.
The rigid sigmoidoscope allows inspection of a maximum of 20-25 cm of distal colon.
Flexible sigmoidoscope can reach up to the splenic flexure
Colonoscopy
It allows good visualization of the whole colon and terminal ileum.
Biopsies can be obtained and polyps removed.
Benign strictures can be dilated and malignant strictures, stented Cancer, polyps and
diverticular disease are the commonest significant findings.


=== PDF p7 | printed 7 | images 0 ===
7
Balloon enteroscopy
Either double or single balloon, can examine the small bowel from the duodenum to
the ileum using specialized enteroscopes in expert centers.
Capsule endoscopy
Used for the evaluation of obscure GI bleeding (after negative gastroscopy and
colonoscopy) and for the detection of small bowel tumors and occult inflammatory
bowel disease.
It should be avoided if strictures are suspected.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)
Performed with a gastroscope incorporating an ultrasound probe at the tip.
It is used diagnostically for lesions in the esophageal or gastric wall, including the
TNM staging of oesophageal/gastric cancer and for the detection and biopsy of
pancreatic tumors and cysts.
Imaging
Full clinical information must be provided before the examination, and ideally, the
images obtained should be reviewed with the radiologist to aid interpretation.
The optimal technique to be used will depend on local expertise.
1. Plain X-rays of the chest and abdomen
Are chiefly used in the investigation of an acute abdomen.
Interpretation depends on analysis of gas shadows inside and outside the bowel.
Plain films are particularly useful where obstruction or perforation is suspected, to
exclude toxic megacolon in colitis and to assess fecal loading in constipation.
Calcification may be seen with gall bladder stones and in chronic pancreatitis, though
CT is more sensitive for both.
2. Ultrasound
involves no radiation and is the first-line investigation for abdominal distension, e.g.
ascites, mass or suspected inflammatory conditions.
It can show dilated fluid-filled loops of bowel in obstruction and thickening of the
bowel wall.
It can be used to guide biopsies or percutaneous drainage.
In an acute abdomen, ultrasound can diagnose cholecystsitis, appendicitis, enlarged
mesenteric glands and other inflammatory conditions.


=== PDF p8 | printed 8 | images 0 ===
8
3. Computed tomography (CT)
With intraluminal contrast injection ( e,g gastrografin) and intra-venous contrast
injection enhance diagnostic capability ( kidney functions must be assessed before
the IV injection of the contrast).
CT is widely used as a first line investigation for the acute abdomen.
CT is sensitive for small volumes of gas from a perforated viscus as well as leakage of
contrast from the gut lumen.
Inflammatory conditions such as abscesses, appendicitis, diverticulitis, Crohn's
disease and its complications are well demonstrated.
In high-grade bowel obstruction, CT is usually diagnostic of both the presence and
the cause of the obstruction.
CT is widely used in cancer staging and as guidance for biopsy of tumor or lymph
nodes.
CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy) after CO2 insufflation into a previously
cleansed colon provides an alternative to colonoscopy for diagnosis of colon mass
lesions .
4. Magnetic Resonance Imaging MRI
It has the advantage over CT that it uses no radiation and is useful in the evaluation
of rectal cancers and abscesses and fistula in the perianal region.
It is also useful in small bowel disease and in hepatobiliary and pancreatic disease.
5. Magnetic resonance enterography
Is a magnetic resonance imaging technique used to evaluate bowel wall features of
both upper and lower gastro-intestinal tract.
Although it is usually used for small bowel evaluation.
It is a less invasive technique with the advantages of no ionizing radiation exposure,
multiplanarity and high contrast resolution for soft tissue.
6. Positron emission tomography (PET)
relies on detection of the metabolism of fluorodeoxyglucose.
It is used for staging esophageal, gastric and colorectal cancer and in the detection of
metastatic and recurrent disease


=== PDF p9 | printed 9 | images 0 ===
9
7. Contrast studies
Barium swallow:
Examines the esophagus and proximal stomach.
Its main use is for investigating dysphagia.
Double-contrast barium meal:
Examines the esophagus, stomach and duodenum, however Gastroscopy is a more
sensitive test and enables biopsy of suspicious areas.
Small bowel follow-through:
Specifically examines the fold pattern and calibre of the small bowel .
Specific views of the terminal ileum can be obtained and are used to identify early
changes in patients with suspected Crohn's disease or TB
Small bowel enema (enteroclysis):
A tube is passed into the duodenum and a large volume of dilute barium is
introduced.
It is particularly used to demonstrate strictures or adhesions when there is suspicion
of intermittent obstruction.
Generally, this has been replaced by MR enteroclysis.
Barium enema examines the colon and is used for altered bowel habit.
Colonoscopy and CT colonography have largely replaced this examination for rectal
bleeding, polyps and inflammatory bowel disease.
Absorbable water-soluble (Gastrografin ) contrast agents should be used in
preference to barium when perforation is suspected anywhere in the gut.


=== PDF p10 | printed 10 | images 1 ===
10
The esophagus
Structure and physiology:
- the esophagus is 20 cm long that connects the pharynx to the stomach.
- the esophagus is lined by stratified squamous epithelium.
- the esophagus is separated from the pharynx by the upper esophageal sphincter
(UES).
- The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) consists of a 2-4 cm in the distal end of the
esophagus that responsible for the prevention of gastric reflux.
Symptoms of esophageal disorders
1. Dysphagia:
- Difficulty of swallowing.
- The characteristics of the progression of dysphagia can be helpful progression over
a few weeks suggests a malignant stricture.
- The slow onset of dysphagia for solids and liquids at same time suggest motility
disorder (e.g. Achalasia).
Causes of dysphagia
- Disease of mouth and tongue e.g. Tonsillitis .
- Neuromuscular disorders e.g. Bulbar palsy , myasthenia gravis .
- Esophageal motility disorders e.g. Achalasia ,scleroderma ,diffuse esophageal
spasm, diabetes mellitus, chagas' disease.
- Extrinsic pressure e.g. Mediastinal glands , goiter ,enlarged left atrium
- Intrinsic lesion e.g. Foreign body, stricture: Benign or malignant - carcinoma,
esophageal web ,pharyngeal pouch.
2. Odynophagia:
Is pain during swallowing and is suggestive of esophagitis.
3. Substernal discomfort, heartburn:
This is a common symptom of reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus.
4. Regurgitation:
Is the effortless reflux of esophageal contents into the mouth and pharynx.


=== PDF p11 | printed 11 | images 2 ===
11
Signs of esophageal disorders
The main sign of esophageal disease is weight loss due to reduced food intake.
Investigations for esophageal disorders
1. Esophagoscopy.
2. Barium swallow and meal.
3. Manometry:
It is used to assess esophageal motor activity.
4. PH monitoring:
24-hour ambulatory monitoring uses a PH-sensitive probe positioned in the lower
esophagus


=== PDF p12 | printed 12 | images 1 ===
12
Gastroesophogeal reflux disease (GERD)
Pathophysiology
- The reflux occur when the anti-reflux mechanisms fail, allowing acidic gastric
contents to make prolonged contact with the lower esophageal mucosa.
- Decrease tone of lower esophageal sphincter (LES).
Risk factors
1) Increase intra-abdominal pressure : Pregnancy or obesity
2) Diet: Fat, chocolate, coffee, alcohol and large meals.
3) Drugs: Antimuscarinic, calcium channel blockers, nitrates.
4) Cigarette smoking
5) Hiatus hernia ( described below )
Clinical features
- Heartburn is the major feature.
The burning is aggravated by lying down and relieved by oral antacids.
- Regurgitation of food and acid into the mouth.
- Aspiration pneumonia
Diagnosis and investigations
- The clinical diagnosis can usually be made without investigation.
- If there is alarm signs e.g. Weight loss, no response to ppi the following
Investigations:
1) 24-hour ph monitoring.
2) Upper endoscopy.
3) Manometry.
Esophageal reflux and cardiac ischemia
- Reflux pain: Burning, worse on lying down , don‘t radiates to the arms ,worse with
hot drinks or alcohol and is relieved by antacids
- Cardiac ischemic pain: Gripping or crushing radiates to neck or left arm ,worse with
exercise accompanied by dyspnea


=== PDF p13 | printed 13 | images 1 ===
13
Treatment
- Simple measures :
Simple antacids.
Loss of weight and raising the head of the bed at night.
Reduction in caffeine consumption.
Stop smoking and alcohol intake.
- Drugs:
Proton pump inhibitors e.g. Omeprazole, reduce gastric acid secretion and
are the drugs of choice for mild cases.
H2 blockers e.g. Ranitidine.
Antacids.
Dopamine antagonist as metoclopramide and domperidone are increase
peristalsis and speed emptying .
- Endoluminal gastroplication:
This recent technique could be performed by endoscopy:

endoscopic full-thickness plication (GERDX):
A endoscopic device has been designed to inhibit gastroesophageal reflux by
placing a transmural plication near the gastroesophageal junction under
direct endoscopic visualization.

Anti-reflux mucosal ablation (ARMA):
Mucosal ablation around the gastroesophageal junction to cause a healing
process to re-form the cardiac opening
- Surgery:
Management of sliding hiatus hernia (described below )
Complications
- peptic stricture: since the introduction of PPIs, peptic strictures have become less
common.


=== PDF p14 | printed 14 | images 1 ===
14
Barrett's esophagus
- The normal esophageal squamous epithelium is replaced by metaplastic columnar
mucosa.
- Premalignant: Esophageal adenocarcinoma.
- Barrett's is commonest in middle-aged obese men.
- Diagnosis: Endoscopy, chromo-endoscopy.
- Treatment : Radiofrequency ablation (RFA).
Benign esophageal stricture
- Peptic stricture secondary to reflux is the most common cause of benign strictures
- They also occur after the ingestion of corrosives, after radiotherapy, after sclerosis
of varices.
- Dysphagia is usually managed by endoscopic dilatation.
- Surgery is sometimes required.
Esophageal infections
- Infection is a cause of painful swallowing and is seen in immunosuppressed (e.g. On
Chemotherapy) and aids.
- Infection can occur with:
candida - herpes simplex - cytomegalovirus - tuberculosis.
- In candidiasis, the characterize by white plaques.
- Most patients on large doses of immunosuppressive agents are treated
prophylactically for candida with nystatin or amphotericin.


=== PDF p15 | printed 15 | images 1 ===
15
Hiatus hernia
- A hiatus hernia describes the protrusion of an organ from the abdominal cavity into
the chest through the esophageal hiatus.
- This is typically the stomach that herniates.
- Extremely common disease.
Classification
Sliding hiatus hernia (85 %): The gastro-oesophageal Junction (GOJ), the abdominal
part of the oesophagus, and the cardia of the stomach ‘’slide‟ upwards through the
diaphragmatic hiatus into the thorax. ( fig. A )
Rolling or paraesophageal hernia (10%): An upward movement of the gastric fundus
through esophageal hiatus occurs to lie alongside a normally placed GOJ. This is a
true hernia with a peritoneal sac. ( fig. B )
A mixed type hiatus hernia: which has both a rolling and sliding components
Risk factors
Age:
Is an important risk factor, due to:
A combination of age- related loss of diaphragmatic tone, increasing intra-abdominal
pressures (e.g. Repetitive coughing), and widening of diaphragmatic hiatus.
Increased intra-abdominal pressure:
Pregnancy, obesity, and ascites due to upwards displacement of the abdominal
viscera.
Clinical features of sliding h.h
The majority of hiatus hernias are asymptomatic.
Gastro-esophageal reflux symptoms:
1) Marked burning epigastric pain: made worse by lying flat and on leaning forwards,
patient experiences relief on raising head of bed.
2) Vomiting – Regurgitation.
3) Bleeding and anemia secondary to esophageal ulceration leading either melena,
occult blood in stool or hematemesis in severe cases.
4) Dysphagia (esophageal stricture on long-standing cases)
5) Sometimes weight loss in case of long duration vomiting and dyspepsia.
Epigastric tenderness in case of associated gastritis


=== PDF p16 | printed 16 | images 2 ===
16
Investigations
1.upper endoscopy:
It is the standard investigation for esophageal disorders showing upward
displacement of the gastro-esophageal junction also (z-line).
During inspiration the GOJ is opened and closed in expiration
It shows evidence of reflux as hyperemia, fissuring, ulceration or stricture of the
lower esophagus
Biopsy may be taken from suspicious areas (areas of barrett's)
2. Plain x-ray chest:
Fundic air may be evident in the chest
Detects chest complications as aspiration pneumonia.
3. Barium swallow:
Evidence of complication as stricture esophagus.
4. Barium meal in trendlenberg‘s position:
Reflux of the barium to the esophagus in GERD
Stomach above the diaphragm in big hiatus hernia.
5. Ct abdomen and chest
6. Ph test: Shows increased acid level in the esophagus.(diagnostic for reflux)
Treatment:
Life-style changes as:

Losing weight.

Decreasing the size of meals.

Avoiding certain acidic foods, such as tomato sauce and citrus

Limiting fried and fatty foods, foods containing caffeine (including chocolate),

Eating meals at least three to four hours before lying down, and avoiding
bedtime snacks

Keeping head higher than the rest of body when lying on the back.

Stop smoking

Avoid a tight belt or tight clothing.
CXR: stomach in the chest
Barium meal: sliding H.H


=== PDF p17 | printed 17 | images 1 ===
17
Medications:
I. Antacids that neutralize stomach acid.
Ii. H2 blockers.
Iii. Proton pump inhibitors.
NB: ppi stronger acid blockers than h2 blockers and allow for damaged esophageal
tissue to heal.
Surgery:

To correct gastro-esophageal reflux by creating a competent valve mechanism at
the lower end of the esophagus.

To repair the widened esophageal hiatus
Indications:

severe symptoms of reflux with failure of medical treatment

patient has large h.h.

presence of complications: (ulceration, severe inflammation, bleeding, stricture,
Barrett‘s)
Fundoplication:

Surgery involves pulling the hiatal hernia (fundus) back into the abdomen

Wrapping the fundus of the stomach around the lower portion of the esophagus.

This creates a permanently competent sphincter so that stomach contents will
not reflux back into the esophagus

Repair the wide esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm.

The fundic wrap is 360° (in nissen‘s technique) and 270° in (toupet technique)

The procedure can be done laparoscopically better than laparotomy.
Complications of fundoplication:
O Dysphagia
O Inability to belch
O Slipped nissen and recurrence of herniation


=== PDF p18 | printed 18 | images 0 ===
18
Achalasia of esophagus
- It is a primary esophageal motility disorder characterized by failure of LES
relaxation and loss of peristalsis in the distal esophagus.
Pathophysiology
Vagal degeneration:
LES contraction and relaxation are regulated through vagus nerve
Degeneration of ganglion cells in mesenteric plexus concerned with the inhibitory
neurons →increased tone in LES →severe spasm.
Causes of achalasia
I- primary achalasia: Etiology unknown,hereditary, degenerative, autoimmune
Ii-secondary achalasia: (e.g. Secondary to chaga‘s disease)
Clinical presentations
- Dysphagia for liquids more than solids most significant symptom. (effect of weight).
- Difficulty belching.
- Regurgitation (especially when lying flat at night)
- Heartburn and chest pain in case of esophagitis
- Weight loss is minimal and late
- Hiccups
Complications associated with achalasia
• Pneumonic aspiration
• Esophageal cancer


=== PDF p19 | printed 19 | images 0 ===
19
Investigations
I- Radiographic evaluation
II- Manometric evaluation
III- endoscopic evaluation
I- radiographic evaluation
1- chest x-ray:
Markedly dilated esophagus with widening of mediastinum
Absent gastric air bubble: Swallowed air does not reach the fundus
2- barium swallows: Diagnostic tool
Smooth narrowing of the distal esophagus at the level of the lower esophageal
sphincter with the characteristic “bird beak” appearance.
The proximal esophagus is markedly dilated
Absent gastric air bubble
II-esophageal manometry: Confirm the diagnosis
Elevated resting LES pressure (spasm).
Incomplete LES relaxation.
Weak peristalsis of esophageal wall (aperistalsis).
III- endoscopic evaluation:
To exclude cancer of the gastro-esophageal junction.
Detects spasm of the LES.


=== PDF p20 | printed 20 | images 0 ===
20
Management
Pharmacological agents:
Patients who are unable to tolerate more invasive treatment modalities.
1- Calcium channel blockers and nitrates decrease LES pressure.
2- Endoscopic intra-sphincteric injection of botulinum toxin:
Blocks release of Acetylcholine at the level of the LES →relaxation of the sphincter
Endoscopic techniques:
A- pneumatic dilatation:
It is the most effective non-surgical treatment option for patients with achalasia.
The balloon is inflated at the level of the gastro-esophageal junction to dilate the
muscle fibers while leaving the mucosa intact.
B- The per-oral endoscopic myotomy, or Poem:
It is a minimally invasive endoscopic procedure for the treatment of achalasia
Where in the inner circular muscle layer of the lower esophageal sphincter is divided
through a submucosal tunnel.
Surgical:
Laparoscopic heller’s cardio-myotomy
Weakens LES by cutting muscle fibers through performing an anterior myotomy
across the LES.


=== PDF p21 | printed 21 | images 1 ===
21
The Stomach and duodenum
Anatomy
The stomach consists of:
Cardia: adjacent to the gastroesophageal junction.
Fundus: dome-shaped and extends above and to the left of the cardia, toward the
left hemidiaphragm.
Body: extends from the fundus to the lower end of the lesser curve, known as the
incisura angularis.
Antrum: extends from the incisura to the pyloric canal.
Pylorus: area between antrum and duodenum.
-There are two sphincters, the gastro-oesophageal sphincter and the pyloric
sphincter.
- The mucosa of the upper two-thirds of the stomach contains parietal cells that
secrete hydrochloric acid, and chief cells that secrete pepsinogen (which initiates
proteolysis).
- The antral mucosa secretes bicarbonate and contains mucus-secreting cells and
G cells, which secrete gastrin, stimulating acid production.
- Somatostatin, a suppressant of acid secretion, is also produced by specialized antral
cells (D cells).
- Mucus-secreting cells are present throughout the stomach and secrete mucus and
bicarbonate.
- The mucus is made of glycoproteins called mucins.
- The 'mucosal barrier', made up of the plasma membranes of mucosal cells and the
mucus layer, protects the gastric epithelium from damage by acid , aspirin, NSAIDs
alcohol and bile salts.
- Prostaglandins stimulate secretion of mucus, and their synthesis is inhibited by
aspirin and NSAIDs, which inhibit cyclo-oxygenase
- The duodenal mucosa has villi like the rest of the small bowel, and also contains
Brunner's glands that secrete alkaline mucus, This along with the pancreatic and
biliary secretions, helps to neutralize the acid secretion from the stomach when it
reaches the duodenum.


=== PDF p22 | printed 22 | images 0 ===
22
Physiology
Acid secretion is central to the functionality of the stomach.
Acid is not essential for digestion but does prevent some food-borne infections.
It is under neural and hormonal control and both stimulate acid secretion through
the direct action of histamine on the parietal cell.
Acetylcholine and gastrin also release histamine via the enterochromaffin cells.
Somatostatin inhibits both histamine and gastrin release and therefore acid
secretion.
Other major gastric functions are:
- Reservoir for food.
- Emulsification of fat and mixing of gastric contents.
- Secretion of intrinsic factor .


=== PDF p23 | printed 23 | images 2 ===
23
Gastritis
Gastritis is the inflammation of the gastric mucosa.
Gastritis is classified based on the acuity of the condition (acute versus chronic), the
histological features of inflammation, or the etiology.
Gastropathy is a gastric mucosal disorder without inflammation, featuring epithelial
injury and subsequent regeneration.
Gastropathy is usually caused by:
Bile reflux.
Hypovolemia.
Chronic congestion as in portal hypertension (called portal hypertensive
gastropathy)
Gastritis and gastropathy are not mutually exclusive conditions and might sometimes
coexist.
In clinical practice, gastritis may be accompanied by signs of mucosal injury, whereas
gastropathy may present with an inflammatory reaction in the gastric mucosa.
Causes of Gastritis :
1-H.pylori gastritis (commonest cause).
2-Erosive and hemorrhagic gastritis (NSAIDs).
3-Autoimmune gastritis.
4-Viral infection (CMV & herpes simplex).
5-Crohn’s disease.
Acute Gastritis
Acute gastritis refers to a sudden onset of inflammation of the gastric mucosa.
In contrast, chronic gastritis refers to long-lasting inflammation of the gastric mucosa.
With acute gastritis, a disruption in the gastric mucosa triggers an inflammatory
immune response that attracts white blood cells to the site of injury.
If the mucosal damage is severe enough, acute gastritis can progress to erosive
gastritis, which consists of shallow lesions of the mucosa (i.e. gastric erosions),
ulcerations , and small areas of bleeding within the mucosa.


=== PDF p24 | printed 24 | images 0 ===
24
Causes of acute gastritis
Acute gastritis occurs as a result of weakness or injury to the gastric mucosa, which
can allow stomach acids to further damage and inflame the lining.
Frequent or long-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such
as aspirin and ibuprofen. ( Erosive and hemorrhagic gastritis )
NSAIDs work by blocking the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase, resulting in inhibition
of production of prostaglandin E2 that normally increase the production of
gastric mucus and decrease the production of gastric acid.
Bacterial infection by Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is the commonest cause of
gastritis, Although early infection by H. pylori does not cause many symptoms and
usually goes unnoticed. However, long-lasting or chronic infection by H. pylori can
lead to persistent inflammation of the gastric mucosa , gastric ulcer and duodenal
ulcer.
Acute gastritis can also occur as a result of extreme physiological stress, often due to
major surgery, trauma, severe burns, or severe illnesses.
Additional risk factors for developing acute gastritis include increased intake of
alcohol and caffeine and exposure to cigarette smoke, all of which can irritate the
gastric mucosa.
Pathogenesis
Acute gastritis usually lasts for a short period of time. In most cases, it resolves
spontaneously within a few days or weeks once the inflammation has settled.
In other cases, however, acute gastritis can lead to recurrent or long-term
inflammation of the gastric mucosa and can lead to chronic gastritis.
With time, chronic gastritis can increase the risk of developing other complications,
such as stomach ulcers, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and certain types of
stomach neoplasm
Signs and symptoms of acute gastritis
Most individuals with acute gastritis are asymptomatic or experience mild symptoms,
such as loss of appetite, upper abdominal discomfort, belching, nausea, and vomiting.
In more severe cases, some individuals may experience upper gastrointestinal
bleeding due to gastric erosions and ulcerations of the mucosa.


=== PDF p25 | printed 25 | images 0 ===
25
Diagnosis of acute gastritis
Initially, an assessment of the individual‘s medical history is performed to identify
possible causes of acute gastritis, such as long-term use of NSAIDs, excessive alcohol
consumption, or H. pylori infection.
Since acute gastritis is often self-resolving, if a clear cause of inflammation can be
identified and treated successfully, no additional tests may be required.
However, if the diagnosis is uncertain, or if bleeding occurs, an upper endoscopy
may be performed to take a direct look at the gastric mucosa and obtain a biopsy
sample to examine.
Treatment of acute Gastritis
Treatment of acute gastritis is aimed at relieving the underlying cause of
inflammation.
Some cases of acute gastritis resolve without any treatment, while others require
treatment via lifestyle changes or medications.
Proton-pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole or pantoprazole, may aid in relieving
the symptoms of gastritis by helping decrease gastric acid production.
Proton-pump inhibitors, along with a combination of various antibiotics, can also be
used to treat H. pylori infection.
Along with proton-pump inhibitors, medication may feature antacids, including H2
blockers (e.g., famotidine).
It is also important, when possible, to remove or avoid any risk factors that may
contribute to the inflammation.
This may include ceasing use of NSAIDs, reducing caffeine intake, stopping alcohol
intake and smoking.


=== PDF p26 | printed 26 | images 2 ===
26
Chronic Gastritis
There are two types of chronic gastritis: chronic autoimmune gastritis and
Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis.
Chronic autoimmune gastritis
Affects the body and fundus of the stomach (pangastritis) ; and it represents an
example of a type IV hypersensitivity.
In chronic autoimmune gastritis, there are auto-antibodies against H+/K+ ATPase on
parietal cells and intrinsic factor.
leading to atrophic gastritis and loss of parietal cells with achlorhydria and intrinsic
factor deficiency lead to decreased absorption of vitamin B12 causing the clinical
syndrome of pernicious anemia.
Autoantibodies against H+/K+ ATPase decrease gastric acid secretion, thereby
causing hypochlorhydria, which is associated with impaired iron absorption and
hyperplasia of gastrin cells.
Metaplasia, usually of the intestinal type, is almost always in the context of atrophic
gastritis
As a result, there‘s an increased secretion of gastrin, hypergastrinemia, which is a
hormone that has a trophic effect on enterochromaffin-like cells, or ECL cells;
therefore, these individuals are at risk for developing neuroendocrine tumors.
Finally, in chronic autoimmune gastritis chief cells are also lost and this results in
decreased levels of serum pepsinogen.
Diagnosis of chronic autoimmune gastritis includes endoscopic biopsy, but also
detection of anti-parietal cell antibodies, anti-IF antibodies; and levels of serum
gastrin and pepsinogen.


=== PDF p27 | printed 27 | images 3 ===
27
Helicobacter pylori Gastritis
- H. pylori is a slow-growing spiral Gram-negative flagellate urease-producing
bacterium which plays a major role in gastritis and peptic ulcer disease.
- It colonizes the mucous layer in the gastric antrum, but is also found in the
duodenum in areas of gastric metaplasia.
- Antral gastritis is the usual effect of H. pylori infection. It is usually asymptomatic,
although patients without ulcers do sometimes experience relief of dyspeptic
symptoms after Helicobacter eradication.
- Chronic antral gastritis causes hypergastrinaemia due to gastrin release from antral
G cells.
- The subsequent increase in acid output is usually asymptomatic, but can lead to
duodenal ulceration H Pylori gastritis.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of H. pylori is high in developing countries (80-90% of the
population), and much lower (20-50%) in developed countries.
Infection rates are highest in lower income groups.
Infection is usually acquired in childhood; although the exact route is uncertain, it
may be fecal-oral or oral-oral.
The incidence increases with age.


=== PDF p28 | printed 28 | images 0 ===
28
Pathogenesis
-The pathogenetic mechanisms are not fully understood, with the majority of the
colonized population remaining asymptomatic throughout their life.
-H. pylori is highly adapted to the stomach environment, exclusively colonizing
gastric epithelium and inhabiting the mucous layer, or just beneath.
-The production of urease enables the conversion of urea to ammonium and
chloride, which are directly cytotoxic.
-Ulcers are commonest when the infecting strain expresses CagA (cytotoxic-
associated protein) and VacA (vacuolating toxin) genes secondary to a more
pronounced inflammatory and immune response
-The precise mechanism of duodenal ulceration is unclear, as only 15% of patients
infected with H. pylori (50-60% of the adult population worldwide) develop duodenal
ulcers.
- Factors that have been implicated include: increased gastrin secretion, smoking,
bacterial virulence and genetic susceptibility.
- Gastric ulcer (GU): Gastric ulcers are associated with a gastritis affecting the body
as well as the antrum of the stomach (pangastritis) causing parietal cell loss and
reduced acid production.
- The ulcers are thought to occur because of reduction of gastric mucosal resistance
due to cytokine production by the H pylori infection or perhaps to alterations in
gastric mucus.
Other H. pylori associated diseases :
- Gastric adenocarcinoma.
The incidence of distal (but not proximal) gastric cancer parallels that of H. pylori
infection in countries with a high incidence of gastric cancer.
Serological studies show that people infected with H. pylori have a higher
incidence of distal gastric carcinoma (Gastric B cell lymphoma).
Over 70% of patients with gastric B cell lymphomas (mucosal-associated
lymphoid tissue - MALT) have H. pylori.
- H. pylori gastritis has been shown to contain the clonal B cell that eventually gives
rise to the MALT lymphoma.


=== PDF p29 | printed 29 | images 2 ===
29
Diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori infection
Diagnosis of H. pylori is necessary if the clinician plans to treat a positive result.
This is usually in the context of active peptic ulcer disease, previous peptic ulcer
disease or MALT lymphoma, or to 'test and treat' patients with dyspepsia under the
age of 55 with no alarm symptoms (i.e. weight loss, anemia, dysphagia, vomiting, or
family history of gastrointestinal cancer).
Non-invasive methods

Stool antigen test.
This is beginning to be the method of choice to determine the H. pylori status.
A specific immunoassay using monoclonal antibodies for the qualitative detection of
H. pylori antigen is now widely available.
The overall sensitivity and specificity is over 95% .
It is useful in the diagnosis of H. pylori infection and for monitoring efficacy of
eradication therapy.
Patients should be off PPIs for 2 weeks but can continue with H2 blockers.

13 C Urea breath test .
This is a quick and reliable test for H. pylori and can be used as a screening test.
The measurement of 13 CO 2 in the breath after ingestion of 13 C urea.
The test requires a mass spectrometer.
The test is sensitive (90%) and specific (96%), but the sensitivity can be improved by
insuring the patient has not taken antibiotics in the 4 weeks prior and proton pump
inhibitors in the 2 weeks before the test.

Serological tests detect IgG antibodies
Are reasonably sensitive (90%) and specific (83%).
They have been used in diagnosis and in epidemiological studies.
IgG titres may take up to 1 year to fall by 50% after eradication therapy and
therefore are not useful for confirming eradication or the presence of a current
infection.
Urea breath test for detection of
H pylori


=== PDF p30 | printed 30 | images 0 ===
30
Invasive (endoscopy)
Biopsy urease test
Gastric biopsies, usually antral are added to a substrate containing urea and phenol
red. If H. pylori are present, the urease enzyme that they produce splits the urea to
release ammonia which raises the pH of the solution and causes a rapid colour
change (yellow to red).
This enables a patient's H. pylori status to be determined 28 before they leave the
endoscopy unit.
The test may be falsely negative if patients are taking PPIs or antibiotics.
Histology
H. pylori can be detected histologically on routine (Giemsa) stained sections of
gastric mucosa obtained at endoscopy.
Culture
Biopsies obtained can be cultured on a special medium, and in vitro sensitivities to
antibiotics can be tested.
This technique is typically used for patients with refractory H. pylori infection to
identify the appropriate antibiotic regimen and routine culture is rare.
- Diagnosis of H. pylori is necessary if the clinician plans to treat a positive result.
- This is usually in the context of active peptic ulcer disease, previous peptic ulcer
disease or MALT lymphoma, or to 'test and treat' patients with dyspepsia under the
age of 55y with no alarm symptoms i.e., weight loss, anemia, dysphagia, vomiting,
or family history of gastrointestinal cancer.


=== PDF p31 | printed 31 | images 0 ===
31
Management
Eradication therapy
- One of the most commonly used regimen triple therapy for 14 days is :
Omeprazole 20 mg twice / day + Amoxicillin 1g twice / day + clarithromycin 500 mg
twice /day . Treatment should be given for 14 days.
-Metronidazole, clarithromycin, amoxicillin, tetracycline are the most widely used
agents.
- Bismuth subcitrate (120–300 mg) can be used in a quadriple therapy
-Quinolones such as ciprofloxacin are also used when standard regimens have failed
(`rescue therapy').
-None of these drugs is effective alone; eradication regimens therefore usually
comprise two antibiotics given with powerful acid suppression in the form of a PPI
-There is a high incidence of resistance to metronidazole and clarithromycin,
particularly in some populations
-Oral metronidazole has frequent side-effects
-Current recommendations are that all patients with duodenal and gastric ulcers
should have H. pylori eradication therapy if the bacteria is present.
-Eradication therapy is controversial if the patients have incidental H. pylori infection
with no gastric or duodenal ulcer
- In developing countries reinfection is common, compliance with treatment may be
poor and metronidazole resistance is high (>50%) as it is frequently used for parasitic
infections), so failure of eradication is common.


=== PDF p32 | printed 32 | images 1 ===
32
Erosive and hemorrhagic gastritis
This form of gastritis is usually due to drugs as aspirin and NSAIDs.
Aspirin inhibits the synthesis of the protective prostaglandin E2 and F2 α leading to
increased acid secretion and decreased formation of the protective mucosal layer.
The condition may be chronic due to recurrent use of these drugs as in patients with
osteoarthritis.
Alcohol may lead to damage of the mucosal protective layer and gastric erosions.
Stress gastritis occur in stressful situations as in acute myocardial infarction and
cerebrovascular strokes.
Clinical picture

Epigastric pain

Dyspepsia

Gastrointestinal bleeding

In alcoholics and chronic NASID’s users, the gastritis become chronic and may be
completely asymptomatic.
Investigations
Upper endoscopy confirms the diagnosis and is mandatory in any patient having
hematemesis.
Treatment
- H2 receptor blockers.
- Proton pump inhibitors.
- Sucralfate.
- When aspirin and NSAIDs should be prescribed additional gastric protective
treatment may be added.


=== PDF p33 | printed 33 | images 0 ===
33
Peptic ulcer disease
- A peptic ulcer consists of a break in the superficial epithelial cells penetrating down
to the muscularis mucosa of either the stomach or the duodenum; there is a fibrous
base and an increase in inflammatory cells.
- Erosions, by contrast, are superficial breaks in the mucosa alone.
- Most DUs are found in the duodenal cap; the surrounding mucosa appears
inflamed, hemorrhagic or friable (duodenitis).
- GUs are most commonly seen on the lesser curve near the incisura, but can be
found in any part of the stomach.
Epidemiology of peptic ulcer disease:
- Duodenal ulcers affect approximately 10% of the adult population and are two to
three times more common than gastric ulcers.
- Ulcer rates are declining rapidly for younger men and increasing for older
individuals, particularly women.
- Both DUs and GUs are common in the elderly.
- There is considerable geographical variation, with peptic ulcer disease being more
prevalent in developing countries related to the high H. pylori infection.
- In the developed world the percentage of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers is increasing,
as the prevalence of H. pylori declines.
Zollinger Ellison syndrome is a rare cause of peptic ulcer disease which
is due to a tumor called a gastrinoma.
A gastrinoma is a neuroendocrine tumor that is typically located in the
duodenal wall or pancreas, and secretes abnormal amounts of gastrin.
Excess gastrin stimulates parietal cells to release excess hydrochloric
acid, overwhelming normal defense mechanisms and allowing ulcers to
develop in the first portion of the duodenum or even in the distal
duodenum or jejunum.


=== PDF p34 | printed 34 | images 0 ===
34
Clinical features of peptic ulcer disease
-The characteristic feature of peptic ulcer is recurrent, burning epigastric pain.
- It has been shown that if a patient points with a single finger to the epigastriurm as
the site of the pain this is strongly suggestive of peptic ulcer disease.
- The relationship of the pain to food is variable and on the whole not helpful in
diagnosis.
- The pain of a DU classically occurs at night (as well as during the day) and is worse
when the patient is hungry, but this is not reliable.
- The pain of both gastric and duodenal ulcers may be relieved by antacids.
- Nausea may accompany the pain; vomiting is infrequent but can relieve the pain.
- Anorexia and weight loss may occur, particularly with GUs.
- Persistent and severe pain suggests complications such as penetration into other
organs.
- Back pain suggests a penetrating posterior ulcer.
- Severe ulceration can occasionally be symptomless, as many who present with
acute ulcer bleeding or perforation have no preceding ulcer symptoms.
- Untreated, the symptoms of a DU relapse and remit spontaneously.
- The natural history is for the disease to remit over many years due to the onset of
atrophic gastritis and a decrease in acid secretion.
-Examination is usually unhelpful ; epigastric tenderness is common in non-ulcer
dyspepsia.
Investigation of suspected peptic ulcer disease

Patients under 55 years of age with typical symptoms of peptic ulcer disease
who test positive for H. pylori can start eradication therapy without further
investigation.

Endoscopic diagnosis and exclusion of cancer is required in older patients .

All gastric ulcers must be biopsied to exclude an underlying malignancy and
should be followed up endoscopically until healing has taken place.

Endoscopy is required in all patients with alarm symptoms.

Patients with a risk of bleeding or those with complications, i.e. haemorrhage or
perforation, should always have a stool test for H. pylori or a 13 C urea breath
test 6 weeks after the end of treatment to be sure eradication is successful.


=== PDF p35 | printed 35 | images 4 ===
35
NSAIDs and ulcers
- Aspirin and other NSAIDs deplete mucosal prostaglandins by inhibiting the cyclo-
oxygenase (COX) pathway, which leads to mucosal damage.
- Cyclo-oxygenase occurs in two main forms: COX-1, the constitutive enzyme, and
COX-2, inducible by cytokine stimulation in areas of inflammation.
- COX-2 specific inhibitors have less effect on the COX-1 enzyme in the gastric
mucosa. It still produce gastric mucosal damage but less than with other
conventional NSAIDs.
- Only a small proportion of patients have symptoms (about 5%) and only 1-2% have
a major problem, i.e. GI bleed.
- Because of the large number of patients on NSAIDs including low-dose aspirin for
vascular prophylaxis, this is a significant problem, particularly in the elderly.
Figure 14 ; Mechanism of action of traditional NSAID and anti COX -2 inhibitors
FORREST I
FORREST II
FORREST III


=== PDF p36 | printed 36 | images 0 ===
36
Treatment
- Stop the ingestion of NSAIDs.
- A PPI should be given.
- H. pylori eradication therapy if H. pylori positive.
- In many people with severe arthritis, stopping NSAIDs may not be possible,
therefore
- Use: -A NSAID with low GI side-effects at lowest dose possible or if there is
no cardiovascular risk, a COX-2 NSAID can be used.
- Prophylactic cytoprotective therapy, e.g. PPI or misoprostol (a synthetic analogue
of prostaglandin for all high-risk patients, i.e. over 65 years; those with a peptic
ulcer history, particularly with complications, and patients on therapy with
corticosteroids or anticoagulants.
- PPIs reduce the risk of endoscopic duodenal and gastric ulcers and are better
tolerated than misoprostol, which causes diarrhoea.


=== PDF p37 | printed 37 | images 0 ===
37
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding
- The cardinal features are hematemesis (the vomiting of blood) and melena (the
passage of black tarry stools; the black color due to blood altered by passage
through the gut).
- Melena can occur with bleeding from any lesion proximal to the right colon (the
ligament of Teriz).
- Following a bleed from the upper G tract, unaltered blood can appear per rectum,
but the bleeding must be massive and usually accompanied by shock.
- The passage of dark blood and clots without shock is always due to lower GI
bleeding.
Etiology
Peptic ulceration is one of the commonest causes of serious and life-threatening
gastrointestinal bleeding.
The relative incidence of causes depends on the patient population.
Drugs:

Aspirin (even 75 mg/day) and other NSAIDs can produce ulcers and erosions.
These agents are also responsible for GI hemorrhage from both duodenal and
gastric ulcers, particularly in the elderly.

Corticosteroids in the usual therapeutic doses have no influence on GI
hemorrhage.

Ant-coagulants do not cause acute GI hemorrhage but bleeding from any cause
is greater if the patient is anti-coagulated.
Clinical approach to the patient
All cases with a recent (within 48 hours) significant GI bleed should be seen in
hospital.
An ABCDE assessment is mandatory to determine whether the patient is unstable or
stable.


=== PDF p38 | printed 38 | images 0 ===
38
The ABCDE approach :
Airway (A)
Airway obstruction is an emergency.
Untreated, airway obstruction causes hypoxia to the vital organs, cardiac arrest, and
death.
Breathing (B)
During the immediate assessment of breathing, it is vital to diagnose and treat
immediately life-threatening conditions (e.g. acute severe asthma, pulmonary
oedema, tension pneumothorax, and massive haemothorax).
Circulation (C)
In almost all medical and surgical emergencies, consider hypovolemia to be the
primary cause of shock, until proven otherwise.
Unless there are obvious signs of a cardiac cause, give intravenous fluid to any
patient with cool peripheries and a fast heart rate.
Disability (D)
Common causes of unconsciousness include profound hypoxia, hypercapnia,
cerebral hypoperfusion, or the recent administration of sedatives or analgesic drugs.
Exposure (E)
To examine the patient properly full exposure of the body may be necessary.
The patient‘s dignity must be respected , also care to minimize heat loss.
In many, no immediate treatment is required as there has been only a small amount
of blood loss. Approximately 85% of patients stop bleeding spontaneously within 48
hours.
Emergency management of unstable patient with acute GI bleeding

History and examination. Note co-morbidity
History suggestive of acid – peptic disease
Alcoholic liver diseases / chronic hepatitis / Cirrhosis
History of anticoagulant / anti platelets / NSAIDS / Alcohol binge intake /
steroids
History of Coagulation disorder / Blood Dyscrasias
History of Epistaxis or Hemoptysis to rule out the GI source of bleeding
Patients of BURN, Sepsis, Head Trauma may have stress ulcers


=== PDF p39 | printed 39 | images 0 ===
39

Monitor the pulse and blood pressure half-hourly

Take blood for hemoglobin, urea, electrolytes, liver biochemistry, coagulation
screen, group and cross-matching (2 units initially)

Establish intravenous access - 2 large bore i.v. cannulae
Plasma expanders or 0.9% saline are given until the blood becomes available

Give blood transfusion/colloid if necessary.
Blood volume: The major principle is to rapidly restore the blood volume to normal.
This can be best achieved by transfusion of red cell concentrates via one or more
large bore intravenous cannulae; plasma expanders or 0.9% saline are given until the
blood becomes available.
The pulse rate and venous pressure are the best guides to adequacy of transfusion.
A central venous pressure line is inserted for patients with organ failure who require
blood transfusion, and in those most at risk of developing heart failure.
Indications for blood transfusion are:
a. SHOCK (pallor, cold nose, systolic BP below 100 mmHg, pulse >100 b.p.m.)
b. Low Hb in patients with recent or active bleeding
Hemoglobin levels are generally a poor indicator of the need to transfuse because
anemia does not develop immediately as hemodilution has not taken place.
However, if the Hb is <10mg/dl and the patient has either bleed recently or is
actively bleeding, transfusion is usually necessary.
In most patients, the bleeding stops temporarily, so that further assessment can be
made
NB : Transfusion must be monitored to avoid overload leading to heart failure,
particularly in the elderly.

Oxygen therapy should be given by facemask

Nasogastric tube for gastric wash and monitoring the bleeding the patient
should be kept nil by mouth until endoscopy has been performed.

Urgent endoscopy after stabilizing the patient in shocked patients / liver
disease.

Continue to monitor pulse and BP

Re-endoscope for continued bleeding/hypovolemia

Interventional Radiology with embolization of the bleeding vessel also consider
surgery


=== PDF p40 | printed 40 | images 3 ===
40
- In addition, stop NSAIDs, aspirin, clopidogrel and warfarin if patients are taking
them.
- Stopping antiplatelets can be dangerous and produce thrombosis , an urgent
discussion with a cardiologist is needed .
- Patient is best manged by multidisciplinary approach ( Medicine , endoscopy ,
interventional radiology , surgery)
- Patients should be managed in high-dependency beds.
- Patients with large bleeds and clinical signs of shock require urgent resuscitation.

Endoscopy
Endoscopy will usually make a diagnosis and enable therapy to be performed if
needed.
Endoscopy should be performed as soon as possible after the patient has been
resuscitated.
Endoscopy can detect the cause of the hemorrhage in 80% or more of cases.
In patients with a peptic ulcer, if the stigmata of a recent bleed are seen (i.e. a
spurting vessel, active oozing, fresh or organized blood clot or black spots) the
patient is more likely to re-bleed.
At first endoscopy:
Bleeding ulcers and those with stigmata of recent bleeding should be treated with
two or three haemostatic methods.
Haemostatic methods:

Injection with diluted epinephrine (adrenaline)

thermal coagulation (with heater probe. bipolar probe, laser or argon plasma
coagulation)

endoscopic clipping because dual and triple therapy is more effective than
monotherapy in reducing rebleeding.
- If varices are present , it should be treated, usually with banding.
- Antral biopsies should be taken to look for H. pylori.
- A positive biopsy urease test is valid, but a negative test is not reliable.
- If the urease test is negative, gastric histology should always be performed.


=== PDF p41 | printed 41 | images 4 ===
41
Injection Therapy
- Injection therapy delivers temporary local tamponade and vasoconstriction
- Use of vasoconstricting agents e.g, epinephrine further reduce blood flow (inject
0.5- to 1.0-mL aliquots of epinephrine (1 : 10,000) via a sclerotherapy needle into
four quadrants of the ulcer within 1 to 2 mm of the bleeding site).
- Other agents used: sclerosants like ethanolamine & thrombogenic agents( less
efficacious).
- Injection therapy not as efficacious as other modalities of monotherapies
- For actively bleeding ulcers, many experts advocate pre-injection in four quadrants
to achieve temporary hemostasis and better visualization
Contact Thermal Therapy
Monopolar Cautery (Cograsper)
Bleeding vessel is compressed and then coagulated.
Low wattage (10-15 watts in duodenum; 15-20 in stomach) is used for a prolonged
time (8-12 second pulses) .
End point of treatment is when involved vessel flattens out & there is no bleeding.
Contact Thermal Therapy
Bipolar Cautery
- Thermal modality used most extensively
- For bipolar thermal coagulation, the energy output should be set at 20–25 W with
the probe firmly applied on the vessel for several seconds until cavitation or a
‘footprint’ is obtained
- Provides local temponade and coaptive coagulation of the underlying vessel
Non-Contact Thermal Therapy
APC is a non-contact method of delivering high-frequency monopolar current
through ionized and electrically conductive argon gas
Power/gas flow settings were 50 W and 2 L/min


=== PDF p42 | printed 42 | images 2 ===
42
Mechanical Treatment
- Therapy of choice in obvious arterial bleeding
- Endoscopic hemoclips are widely used.
- Has theoretical advantage over cautery of not causing further tissue damage.
- Re-bleeding rates are reduced with endoclips
Drug therapy
After diagnosis at endoscopy
- Intravenous omeprazole 80 mg followed by infusion 8 mg/h for 72 hours should be
given to all patients with actively bleeding ulcers or ulcers with a visible vessel, as it
reduces rebleeding rates and the need for surgery .
Uncontrolled or repeat bleeding:
- Endoscopy should be repeated to assess the bleeding site and to treat, if possible.
- Angiography and embolization of the bleeding vessel by interventional radiology.
- Surgery is necessary if bleeding is persistent and/or uncontrollable and should aim
primarily to control the haemorrhage.
Specific conditions:
Oesophageal varices
About 90 % of patients with liver cirrhosis will develop gastro-esophageal varices
over 10 years but only 1/3 of these will bleed.
Esophageal variceal hemorrhage accounts for about 1/3 of deaths in patients with
cirrhosis & portal hypertension.


=== PDF p43 | printed 43 | images 0 ===
43
Prevention of the first bleeding:
- Every patient diagnosed with cirrhosis should have an upper GI endoscopy to assess
the possibility of presence of esophageal or gastric varices.
- Prophylactic measures:
Non-selective β-blockers:
Carvedilol: a non selective beta and alpha1 receptor blocker is used in dose of 6.25
mg twice daily and is well tolerated .
Propranolal.
The portal inflow is reduced by decrease in cardiac output ( β1 ) and by blockade of
β2 vasodilator receptor on the splanchnic arteries.
It is as effective as banding.
It prevents bleeding from congestive gastropathy.
Band ligation through the endoscope, is used when there is contraindications or
intolerance to β blockers e.g. bronchial asthma, heart block, hypotension.
Management of acute variceal bleeding
1-Resuscitation:
Over blood transfusion may cause rebleeding so Patient should be kept with a
hematocrit value around 30.
2- Medical treatment:
PPI IV or H2 blockers.
Vasoconstrictor therapy: for control of emergency bleeding while waiting for
endoscopy in combination with endoscopic techniques. They decrease portal inflow
by splanchnic arterial constriction.

Terlipressin.

Somatostatin and somastostatin analogue (octreotide).
Prophylactic antibiotics: oral or IV.
Measures to prevent encephalopathy.
Vitamin K IV.
Sucralfate to reduce esophageal ulceration after endoscopic therapy.
Patients should have nil by mouth until bleeding has stopped.
Balloon tamponade:
This procedure is rarely used now due to its serious complications as aspiration
pneumonia but can be used if endoscopic therapy or vasoconstructive therapy has
failed or not available.


=== PDF p44 | printed 44 | images 1 ===
44
3.Urgent endoscopy: only after resuscitation:
Variceal banding or Injection sclerotherapy.
By band ligation ,the varix is sucked into the end of the scope and a rubber band is
dislodged over it trip-wire machine that causes necrosis and fibrosis of the varix .
The varices are injected with a sclerosing agent (like ethanolamine oleate) that
produces vessel thrombosis to arrest bleeding.
Gastric varices and big esophageal varices are injected with an adhesive substance
(Histoacryl blue) that sticks to the tissues.
Band ligation and Sclerotherapy are the treatment of choice to detect congestive
gastropathy.
Management of an acute rebleed
Patients may rebleed within 10 days and in this case endoscopic therapy is repeated.
Trans-jugular intrahepatic portocaval shunt (TIPS):
Is used when bleeding cannot be stopped or early rebleeding occurs after
endoscopic therapy within 5 days.
There is an increased risk of portal systemic encephalopathy.
Prevention of recurrent variceal bleeding
Following an episode of variceal bleeding, the risk of recurrence is 60-80% over
a 2 years period and this justify measures to prevent rebleeding.
Band ligation: repeated courses every 2 weeks till obliteration of the varices:
Banding is superior to sclerotherapy.
Non- selective beta- blockers.
Surgical porto-systemic shunting shunt : They reduce the risk of rebleeding but
produce significant encephalopathy.
Liver transplantation.


=== PDF p45 | printed 45 | images 1 ===
45
Mallory-Weiss tear
This is a linear mucosal tear occur-ring at the esophagogastric junction and produced
by a sudden increase in intra-abdominal pressure.
It often occurs after a bout of coughing or retching, There may, however, be no
antecedent history of retching.
Most bleeds are minor and discharge is usual within 24 hours.
The hemorrhage may be large but most patients stop spontaneously.
Early endoscopy confirms diagnosis and allows therapy.
Chronic peptic ulcer
Eradication of H. pylori is started as soon as possible.
A PPI is continued for 4 weeks to ensure ulcer healing.
Eradication of H. pylori should always be checked in a patient who has bled and long-
term acid suppression given if HP eradication is not achieved.
If bleeding is not controlled the patient should either undergo angiography and
embolization or to be referred for surgery.
Gastric carcinoma
Most of these patients do not have large bleeds but surgery is occasionally necessary
for uncontrolled or repeat bleeding.
Usually, surgery can be delayed until the patient has been fully evaluated.
Oozing from gastric cancer is very difficult to control endoscopically.
Radiotherapy can occasionally be successful.
Bleeding after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
Many anti thrombotic medication are in common use after PCI ( unfractionated
heparin, low molecular weight heparin, , platelet inhibitors e.g. clopidogrel .
All these medications give rise to increase GI bleeding .
A bolus of i.v. PPI could be administered followed by an infusion; platelet infusion
can be given to counter the effect of clopidogrel.
Management is difficult as cessation of antiplatelet therapy has a high risk .
Dieulafoy lesion
It is a developmental vascular malformation of the gastrointestinal tract, It is an
enlarged submucosal blood vessel that bleeds in the absence of any abnormality,
such as ulcers or erosions.
The signs and symptoms are related to blood loss, either due to intermittent or
massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
To avoid the complications associated with this condition, it must be promptly
diagnosed and treated.


=== PDF p46 | printed 46 | images 0 ===
46
Acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding
Massive bleeding from the lower GI tract is rare and usually due to diverticular
disease or Ischemic colitis.
Common causes of small bleeds are hemorrhoids and anal fissures.
Management
- The first step is to perform an ABCDE assessment to determine whether the patient
is unstable or stable.
- If patient is unstable, attempts will be made to stabilize the patient ( same
principles as upper GI bleeding) also a nasogastric lavage is performed by placing a
nasogastric tube and instilling water or normal saline into the stomach.
- The liquid is then aspirated. If blood returns , the upper gastrointestinal source of
bleeding is identified.
- On the other hand, if there is no blood, a lower GI bleed is more likely, so you‘ll
need to identify the source.
- If this is the case, angiography, and controlling the bleeding with interventional
radiology embolization, or by endoscopic intervention, or in extreme situations
surgical intervention
- These procedures are both therapeutic and diagnostic, so besides treating the
bleeding, you will be able to find the source and confirm your diagnosis of lower gi
bleed.
- For stable patients, The first step here is to obtain a focused history and physical
exam, including a digital rectal exam, as well as labs like CBC for serial monitoring of
hemoglobin and hematocrit, coagulation studies to assess the need to correct a
coagulopathy, and blood type and crossmatch.
- In addition, an abdominal and pelvic CT scan with oral contrast to look for
pathologies that can cause GI bleed.
- Another important factor is to assess for rectal pain.
- Causes of painless hematochezia include colorectal cancer, Dieulafoy lesion,
diverticular bleeding, and angiodysplasia.
- Causes of hematochezia with pain include infectious or inflammatory colitis, or IBD,
anorectal causes, like hemorrhoids or anal fissures, and Radiation Telangiectasia or
Proctitis.


=== PDF p47 | printed 47 | images 0 ===
47
- Most acute lower GI bleeds start and stop spontaneously.
- The few patients who continue bleeding and are hemodynamically unstable need
resuscitation using the same principles as for upper GI bleeding.
- Surgery is rarely required.
- A diagnosis is made using the history, examination including rectal examination and
the following investigations as appropriate:
Proctoscopy (e.g. anorectal disease, particularly hemorrhoids)
Flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease, cancer,
ischemic colitis, diverticular disease, angiodysplasia)
Angiography - vascular abnormality (e.g. angiodysplasia). The yield of
angiography is low, so it is a test of last resort.
- Isolated episodes of rectal bleeding in the young (<45 years) usually only require
rectal examination and flexible sigmoidoscopy because the probability of a
significant proximal lesion is very low unless there is a strong family history of
colorectal cancer at a young age, Individual lesions are treated as appropriate.


=== PDF p48 | printed 48 | images 0 ===
48
Chronic gastrointestinal bleeding
Patients with chronic bleeding usually present with iron-deficiency anemia.
Chronic blood loss producing iron deficiency anemia in all men, and all women after
the menopause, is always due to bleeding from the GI tract.
The primary concern is to exclude cancer, particularly of the stomach or right colon,
and celiac disease.
Occult blood tests are unhelpful
Chronic blood loss can occur with any lesion of the GI tract that produces acute
bleeding .
However, esophageal varices usually bleed obviously and rarely present as chronic
blood loss.
Hookworm is the most common worldwide cause of chronic GI blood loss.
History and examination may indicate the most likely site of the bleeding, but if no
clue is available it is usual to investigate both the upper and lower GI tract
endoscopically at the same session .

Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is usually performed first.

Duodenal biopsies should always be taken to exclude celiac disease, which is a
recognized cause of iron deficiency.

Colonoscopy follows and any lesion should be biopsied or removed, though it is
not safe to assume that colonic polyps are the cause of chronic blood loss.

Unprepared CT scanning is a reasonable test to look for colon cancer in fragile
patients.

CT colonography can be used as an alternative to colonoscopy.

If gastroscopy, colonoscopy and duodenal biopsy have not revealed the cause,
investigation of the small bowel is necessary.

Capsule endoscopy is the diagnostic investigation of choice, but currently has no
therapeutic ability. Positive diagnostic yield varies from 60% to 85% depending
on series. Bleeding lesions can be identified and later treated with balloon-
assisted enteroscopy.
Treatment
The cause of the bleeding should be treated, if found.
Oral iron is given to treat anaemia , although intravenous infusions are occasionally
required.
Some patients will require maintenance with regular transfusion as a last resort
Prognosis
The mortality from gastrointestinal hemorrhage has not changed from 5-12% over
the years, despite many changes in management, mainly because of a demographic
shift to more elderly patients with co-morbidity.


=== PDF p49 | printed 49 | images 3 ===
49
Diarrhea
Basic physiology
- During fasting, the intestine contains very little fluid.
- On a normal diet of three meals a day, about 9 L of fluid is delivered to the small
intestine.
- 90% is absorbed in the small intestine.
- One to two liters is presented to the colon, and approximately 90% is absorbed.
- The colon has the capacity to absorb all of the fluid presented to it.
- This results in 100 to 200 mL of fluid in the stool.
- Feces on the average contain 100 mL of water, 40 mEq/L of sodium (Na+), 90
mEq/L of potassium (K+), 16 mEq/L of chloride (Cl-), and 30 mEq/L of bicarbonate
(HCO3-).
- Water transport across the intestinal epithelium is passive.
- It is secondary to osmotic gradients generated by active transport of electrolytes
such as Na+ and Clor other solutes, such as sugars and amino acids.
- Na+ is the major ion actively absorbed, and Cl- is the major ion secreted.
- Water is absorbed along with Na+.
- Active Cl- secretion or inhibited Na+ absorption also creates an osmotic gradient
favorable for the movement of fluids from blood to lumen and is the basis of the
secretory diarrheas.


=== PDF p50 | printed 50 | images 6 ===
50
Digestion And Absorption
Carbohydrate Digestion And Absorption
Protein Digestion And Absorption
Handling Of Fats By Small Intestine
Overall Digestive And Absorptive Process In Small


=== PDF p51 | printed 51 | images 1 ===
51
Role of bile acids
Bile acids are not present in the diet but are synthesized in the liver by a series of
enzymatic steps that also include cholesterol catabolism.
Bile acids are either primary or secondary: primary bile acids are synthesized in the
liver from cholesterol, and secondary bile acids are synthesized from primary bile
acids in the intestine by colonic bacterial enzymes.
The primary functions of bile acids are
(1) to promote bile flow
(2) to solubilize cholesterol and phospholipid in the gallbladder by mixed micelle
formation
(3) to enhance dietary lipid digestion and absorption by forming mixed micelles in
the proximal small intestine.
Diarrhea
Diarrhea is a symptom, not a disease, and therefore may occur in many conditions.
Diarrhea is defined as an increase in the fluidity, frequency, and volume of daily
stool output.
Normal stool frequency ranges from three times a week to three times a day.
Perception as normal bowel pattern is related to consistency and frequency.
Consistency is defined as the ratio of fecal water to the water-holding capacity of
fecal insoluble solids.
Acute diarrheas are those lasting less than 4 weeks.
Approximately 80% of acute diarrheas are due to infections with viruses, bacteria,
and parasites.
Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to exclude serious underlying
pathology.
In contrast to acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea are
noninfectious.
Defects Affecting Bile Acids


=== PDF p52 | printed 52 | images 3 ===
52
Classification of diarrhea
Osmotic diarrhea
There is increased amounts of poorly absorbable, osmotically active solutes in the
gut lumen.
Osmotic diarrhea is caused by ingestion of a poorly absorbable solute, usually a
carbohydrate or a divalent ion (e.g., magnesium [Mg2]).
The higher osmolality of the luminal contents causes water influx into the intestinal
lumen across the duodenal and jejunal epithelium to dilute the solute, in an attempt
to make the chyme isotonic
Na+ follows the influx of water from the plasma to the gut lumen due to the
difference in the Na+ concentration gradient.
This Na+ influx causes further influx of water even after the osmolality of the
luminal contents and plasma is identical.
Causes of Osmotic Diarrhea


=== PDF p53 | printed 53 | images 1 ===
53
Secretory diarrhea
There is, increased Cl- and water secretion with or without inhibition of normal
active Na+ and water absorption.
Diarrhea of 1 L or more per day results from secretion of fluid across the intestinal
mucosa.
In most cases, a pathophysiologic event causes small intestinal secretion by
simultaneously stimulating active secretion and partial inhibition of intestinal
absorption.
Often, the intestinal mucosa is intact and has normal histologic findings.
Clinically, there are features that characterize secretory diarrhea
1) Stool volume is usually large (>1 L per day).
2) Stools are watery in consistency.
3) Stools do not contain pus or blood.
4) Diarrhea typically continues while the patient fasts for 24 to 48 hours.
Causes Of Secretory Diarrhea


=== PDF p54 | printed 54 | images 1 ===
54
Exudative diarrhea
There is mucus, blood, and protein from sites of active inflammation into the bowel
lumen
If the intestinal mucosa is inflamed and ulcerated, mucus, blood, and pus leak into
the lumen and are discharged as stool.
This may also create a 1) increased osmotic load and If a large surface area of the
bowel lumen is involved, 2) absorption of ions, solutes, and water will also be
impaired, and patients may have largevolume diarrhea
Inflammation may 3) generate prostaglandins, which stimulate secretion and may
increase bowel motility, thus compounding the diarrhea.
The severity of the diarrhea and the systemic signs and symptoms depends on the
extent of bowel involvement.
Causes Of Exudative Diarrhea
Altered motility
There is increased or decreased contact between luminal contents and mucosal
surface.
Increased motility of the small intestine
Results in decreased contact time of chyme with absorptive surfaces.
Large amounts of fluid delivered to the colon may overwhelm its absorptive
capacity and result in diarrhea.
The reduced contact time in the small intestine may interfere with absorption of
fatty acids and bile salts, allowing them to reach the colon where they induce a
secretory diarrhea.
decreased motility of the small intestine
May allow colonization of the small intestine with colonic-type bacteria.


=== PDF p55 | printed 55 | images 1 ===
55
Clinical classification of diarrhea
Acute diarrhea
Approximately 80% of acute diarrheas are due to infections with viruses, bacteria,
helminthes, and protozoa.
The remainder are secondary to the ingestion of medications, poorly absorbed
sugars (fructose polymers or sorbitol).
Most infectious diarrheas are acquired through fecal-oral transmission from water,
food, or person-to-person contact.
Patients with infectious diarrhea often complain of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain and have watery, malabsorptive, or bloody diarrhea and fever (dysentery).
Food poisoning: is produced by a preformed bacterial toxin that contaminates the
food.
Bacterial replication in the host is not necessary for the development of disease.
Diarrhea resulting from multiplication of organisms in the intestine may be divided
into inflammatory-invasive versus noninflammatory-noninvasive categories.
Epidemiology Of Acute Infectious Diarrhea


=== PDF p56 | printed 56 | images 3 ===
56
Causes of Acute Diarrhea According to the mechanism
Remarks about treatment of acute diarrhea
Acute diarrhea with fluid and electrolyte depletion is a major cause of mortality,
especially in children in developing countries of the world.
Fluid repletion by intravenous or oral routes can prevent death.
Oral rehydration therapy can be accomplished with a simply prepared oral
rehydration solution.
The use of Opiate derivatives include paregoric (tincture of opium), diphenoxylate
with atropine (Lomotil), and loperamide (Imodium) may help in certain selected
cases.
They should not be used in patients with fever, systemic toxicity, or bloody diarrhea.
Antimicrobials should be only used when there is evidence of mucosal invasion.


=== PDF p57 | printed 57 | images 0 ===
57
Refractory diarrhea
Refractory chronic diarrhea unresponsive to specific antimicrobial therapy or
standard unspecific medication may present a challenging and serious clinical
problem.
Causes
Protracted diarrhea in infants and children
Tropical sprue
Persistent diarrhea in travelers
Post-infectious diarrhea induced irritable bowel syndrome
Protracted infectious diarrhea in adults
In the United States, some organisms typically cause a prolonged course of diarrhea.
Organisms that are difficult to diagnose and are known to cause protracted or
prolonged diarrheas include enteropathogenic (enteroadherent) E. coli , Giardia ,
amoeba , Cryptosporidium , Aeromonas , Yersinia enterocolitica , Clostridium
difficile infection is often difficult to clear, and five or more relapses have been
observed .
Clostridium difficile colitis
Originally known as pseudomembranous colitis, was first described as an etiology of
diarrhea from antibiotic use.
Clostridium difficile infection is triggered by toxin production from the bacteria.
Normal bacterial flora is disrupted, the colon is colonized with the Clostridium
difficile bacteria, and toxins are released that cause mucosal damage and
inflammation
Diagnosis requires the presence of 1) diarrhea (at least 3 unformed stools in 24 h) or
2) radiographic evidence of ileus or toxic megacolon, in addition to 3) positive stool
testing for Clostridium difficile toxin or 4) colonoscope or pathologic findings
showing pseudo membranes.
Treatment of Clostridium difficile infection involves discontinuation of the offending
antibiotic.
Metronidazole is the drug of choice for mild infection.
Vancomycin should be used for more severe episodes.
Fidaxomicin is a macrocyclic antibiotic which is more active than vancomycin.
The role of probiotics in prevention and treatment of Clostridium difficile infection is
promising.
Fecal microbiota transplantation has typically been reserved for patients who have
refractory Clostridium difficile colitis.


=== PDF p58 | printed 58 | images 3 ===
58
Post-infectious diarrhea induced irritable bowel syndrome (Brainerd's syndrome)
After documented infectious diarrhea, 25% of patients experience pain, bloating,
urgency, a sense of incomplete evacuation, and loose stools for 6 months or longer.
This syndrome of infectious diarrhea–induced irritable bowel syndrome, also called
Brainerd's diarrhea if it is particularly prolonged and accompanied by severe
diarrhea.
The pathophysiology is thought to be unresolved, mild intestinal inflammation.
In some patients, the syndrome may be the result of bacterial overgrowth and may
be responsive to non-absorbable antibiotics
In others, it may be the result of acquired bile acid malabsorption.
Celiac disease also may manifest after intestinal infections, so patients should be
screened for it in this setting
Pseudomembranous Colitis


=== PDF p59 | printed 59 | images 2 ===
59
Chronic Diarrhea
Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to exclude serious underlying
pathology.
In contrast to acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea are
noninfectious.
Causes
Infections
Giardia lamblia.
Entamoeba histolytica.
Tubercle bacillus.
Clostridium difficile.
Inflammatory bowel disease
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease may result in diarrhea of varying severity,
depending on the extent and degree of bowel involvement.
Diarrhea in Crohn's disease of the small bowel may be compounded by concomitant
bile salt and fat malabsorption.
Endocrine disorders
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Hyperthyroidism.
Carcinoid.
Non-β- cell pancreatic tumor.
Malabsorption syndromes
Neoplasms
Drugs and laxatives
Irritable bowel syndrome


=== PDF p60 | printed 60 | images 0 ===
60
Malabsorption
In the past, it was believed that most malabsorptive diseases manifested with
diarrhea, steatorrhea, or both.
It is now recognized that many malabsorptive disorders, such as celiac disease, might
have subtle clinical presentations or mainly extraintestinal manifestations.
Classically, maldigestion is defined as defective intraluminal hydrolysis of nutrients,
and malabsorption is defined as defective mucosal absorption.
The clinical presentation and complications of maldigestion and malabsorption are
similar.
Malabsorption can be caused by many diseases of the small intestine as well as by
diseases of the pancreas, liver, biliary tract, and stomach.
In some of these diseases, malabsorption may be the presenting feature; in others,
malabsorption may be only a minor clinical problem or detected only as a laboratory
abnormality.
Malabsorption is caused by many different diseases.
Dietary fat is the nutrient most difficult to absorb.
Fat is predominantly insoluble in the aqueous milieu of the intestine and critically
depends on all phases of digestion, absorption, and delivery for its assimilation.
Steatorrhea (excess fat in the stool) is the hallmark of malabsorption.
Malabsorption Syndromes
Malabsorption is characterized by suboptimal absorption of fats, fat-soluble and
other vitamins, proteins, carbohydrates, electrolytes and minerals, and water.
At the most basic level, it is the result of disturbance of at least one of these normal
digestive functions:
1) Intraluminal digestion: The process begins in the mouth with saliva, receives a
major boost from gastric peptic digestion, and continues in the small intestine,
assisted by pancreatic enzyme secretion and the emulsive action of bile.
2) Terminal digestion: which involves the hydrolysis of carbohydrates and peptides
by disaccharidases and peptidases, respectively, in the brush border of the small
intestinal mucosa.
3) Transepithelial transport: in which nutrients, fluid, and electrolytes are
transported across the epithelium of the small intestine for delivery to the intestinal
vasculature or to the intestinal lymphatic system.


=== PDF p61 | printed 61 | images 2 ===
61
The Major Malabsorption Syndromes
Disorders of absorption constitute a broad spectrum of conditions with multiple
etiologies and varied clinical manifestations.
Most, but not all, malabsorption syndromes are associated with steatorrhea, an
increase in stool fat excretion of >6% of dietary fat intake.
Some malabsorption disorders are not associated with steatorrhea.
Disorders of absorption (malabsorption) must be included in the differential
diagnosis of chronic diarrhea.
Most patients will indicate that they have diarrhea, not that they have fat
malabsorption.
Mechanism of malabsorption according to the condition
Overall digestive and absorptive process in small intestine


=== PDF p62 | printed 62 | images 2 ===
62
Clinical Consequences Of Malabsorption Of Nutrients, Water, And Electrolytes


=== PDF p63 | printed 63 | images 2 ===
63
Specific disease examples
Lactase Deficiency ( lactose intolerance)
Acquired lactase deficiency is the most common cause of selective carbohydrate
malabsorption.
The prevalence of lactase deficiency is highest (85 to 100%) in persons of Asian,
African, and Native-American descent.
Adults with lactase deficiency typically complain of gas, bloating, and diarrhea after
the ingestion of milk or dairy products but do not lose weight.
Unabsorbed lactose is osmotically active, drawing water followed by ions into the
intestinal lumen.
On reaching the colon, bacteria metabolize lactose to short-chain fatty acids, carbon
dioxide, and hydrogen gas.
Short-chain fatty acids are transported with sodium into colonic epithelial cells,
facilitating the reabsorption of fluid in the colon.
If the colonic capacity for the reabsorption of short-chain fatty acids is exceeded, an
osmotic diarrhea results.
The diagnosis of acquired lactase deficiency can be made by 1) empirical treatment
with a lactose-free diet, which results in resolution of symptoms;2) by the hydrogen
breath test after oral administration of lactose.
Many intestinal diseases cause secondary reversible lactase deficiency, including
viral gastroenteritis, celiac disease, giardiasis, and bacterial overgrowth.


=== PDF p64 | printed 64 | images 1 ===
64
Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
In health, only small numbers of lactobacilli, enterococci, gram-positive aerobes, or
facultative anaerobes can be cultured from the upper small bowel lumen.
Motility And Acid are the most important factors in keeping the number of bacteria
in the upper small bowel low.
Any condition that produces local stasis or re-circulation of colonic luminal contents
allows development of a predominantly colonic flora (coliforms and anaerobes,
such as Bacteroides and Clostridium) in the small intestine.
This will cause impaired micelle formation by releasing cholylamidases, which
deconjugate bile salts.
As a result, the concentration of bile salts decreases in the intestinal lumen causing
malabsorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin B12 deficiency and carbohydrate malabsorption also can occur with
generalized bacterial overgrowth.
Anaerobic bacteria ingest vitamin B12 and release proteases that degrade brush-
border disaccharidases.
Individuals with bacterial overgrowth usually have low serum vitamin B12 levels but
normal or high folate levels.
This helps distinguish bacterial overgrowth from tropical sprue.
Some Causes Of Bacterial Overgrowth


=== PDF p65 | printed 65 | images 1 ===
65
Celiac Disease
Celiac disease, also called celiac sprue, nontropical sprue, and gluten-sensitive
enteropathy, is an inflammatory condition of the small intestine precipitated by the
ingestion of wheat, rye, and barley in individuals with certain genetic predispositions.
It is the prototype of a noninfectious cause of malabsorption resulting from a
reduction in small intestinal absorptive surface area
The basic disorder in celiac disease is sensitivity to gluten, the component of wheat
and related grains (oat, barley, and rye) that contains the water insoluble protein
gliadin.
The small intestinal mucosa, when exposed to gluten, accumulates large numbers of
B cells and plasma cells sensitized to gliadin; accumulation of lymphocytes in gastric
and colonic mucosa also may occur.
Total flattening of mucosal villi (and hence loss of surface area) is the outcome,
affecting the proximal more than the distal small intestine.
Patients with celiac disease have increased levels of serum antibodies to a variety of
antigens, including IgA antiendomysial , anti gliadin and anti tissue transglutaminase
antibodies ( TTG Ab).
The age of presentation with symptomatic diarrhea and malnutrition varies from
infancy to mid-adulthood.
About half of adults with celiac disease in the present with anemia or osteoporosis
without diarrhea or other gastrointestinal symptoms.
These individuals most likely have proximal disease that impairs iron, folate, and
calcium absorption but an adequate surface area in the remaining intestine for
absorption of other nutrients.
Other Extraintestinal Manifestations Of Celiac Disease include

Rash (dermatitis herpetiformis)

Neurologic disorders (peripheral
neuropathy, ataxia, epilepsy)

Psychiatric disorders (depression,
paranoia)

Reproductive disorders (infertility,
spontaneous abortion)

Short stature

Dental enamel hypoplasia

Chronic hepatitis


=== PDF p66 | printed 66 | images 2 ===
66

Cardiomyopathy.
Individuals with significant mucosal involvement present with watery diarrhea,
weight loss or growth retardation, and the clinical manifestations of vitamin and
mineral deficiencies.
Diarrhea is caused by many mechanisms, including
1) Decreased surface area for water and electrolyte absorption.
2) The osmotic effect of unabsorbed luminal nutrients
3) Increased surface area for chloride secretion (crypt hyperplasia)
4) Stimulation of intestinal fluid secretion by inflammatory mediators and
unabsorbed fatty acids.
Recently The perception that gluten causes gastrointestinal and extra
gastrointestinal symptoms in patients who do not have coeliac disease (CD), and are
not allergic to wheat, is an increasing clinical problem.
This has been called Non-coeliac Gluten Sensitivity (NCGS).
It is purely a clinical diagnosis as, in contrast to CD, it has no biomarker or
characteristic intestinal biopsy findings.
Disease association with ciliac disease


=== PDF p67 | printed 67 | images 0 ===
67
Tropical Sprue And Whipple Disease
Are two disorders that exemplify malabsorption syndromes arising from intestinal
infection.
Tropical sprue resembles celiac disease in symptomatology but occurs almost
exclusively in persons living in or visiting the tropics.
Small intestinal changes vary from near normal to a severe diffuse enteritis with
villus flattening.
In contrast to celiac disease, injury is seen at all levels of the small intestine.
It is caused by overgrowth of predominantly coliform bacteria.
Individuals with tropical sprue classically present with diarrhea and megaloblastic
anemia secondary to vitamin B12 and folate deficiency, but some have anemia only.
Intestinal biopsy characteristically shows subtotal and patchy villous atrophy in the
proximal and distal small intestine.
Treatment is a prolonged course of tetracycline (250 mg PO four times daily) or
doxycycline (100 mg PO two times daily), folic acid (5 mg/day PO), and, with
coexistent deficiency, vitamin B12 injections (1000 μg weekly).
Whipple disease is a rare, systemic infection that may involve any organ of the
body but principally affects the Intestine, Central Nervous System, And Joints.
The hallmark of Whipple disease is a small intestinal mucosa laden with distended
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive macrophages in the lamina propria.
The organism responsible for causing Whipple disease is a gram-positive
actinomycete, Tropheryma whippelii.
Approximately one third of patients have cardiac involvement, most commonly
culture negative endocarditis.
Occasionally, individuals present with ocular or neurologic disease without
gastrointestinal symptoms.
Men are affected more commonly than women, particularly white men.
Treatment is with a prolonged course of broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g.,
ceftriaxone, 2 g/day intravenously (IV) or meropenem 1 g IV three times daily; then
trimethoprim 160 mg and sulfamethoxazole 800 mg PO two times daily for 1 year.


=== PDF p68 | printed 68 | images 0 ===
68
Diagnostic tests for malabsorption
1) General tests of absorption
Quantitative stool fat test Gold standard test of fat malabsorption.
Requires ingestion of a high-fat diet (70- 100 g) for 2 days before and during the
collection.
Stool is collected for 2-3 days. Normally, <7 g/24 hr is excreted on a high-fat diet
Qualitative stool fat test Sudan stain of a stool sample for fat.
D-Xylose test A test of small intestinal mucosal absorption, used to distinguish
mucosal malabsorption from malabsorption due to pancreatic insufficiency.
Hydrogen breath test
Most useful in the diagnosis of lactase deficiency.
An oral dose of lactose (25 g) is administered after measurement of basal breath H2
levels.
The sole source of H2 in the mammal is bacterial fermentation; unabsorbed lactose
makes its way to colonic bacteria, resulting in excess breath H2
2) Tests for Pancreatic Function
Secretin stimulation test
The gold standard test of pancreatic function
Fecal elastase-1 test
Stool test for pancreatic function
3) Tests for Bacterial Overgrowth
Quantitative culture of small intestinal aspirate
Gold standard test for bacterial overgrowth
Hydrogen breath test
The 50-g glucose breath test has a sensitivity of 90% for growth of 105 colonic-type
bacteria in the small intestine
14C-D-xylose breath test
This test uses 1 g of carbon 14–labeled D-xylose.
It has a sensitivity and specificity >90%


=== PDF p69 | printed 69 | images 1 ===
69
4) Tests for Mucosal Disease
Small-bowel biopsy: Distal duodenal biopsy specimens are usually adequate for
diagnosis.
Permeability studies: These tests of mucosal integrity are gaining favor as screening
tests for small intestinal disease and for monitoring response to treatment
5) Test of Ileal Function
SeHCAT test
This is a test of bile acid absorption.
Seven days after ingestion of radiolabeled synthetic selenium–homocholic acid
conjugated with taurine (SeHCAT), whole body retention is measured by a gamma-
counting device.
The result is expressed as a fraction of baseline ingestion
Schilling test: No longer used


=== PDF p70 | printed 70 | images 2 ===
70
Algorithm To Chronic Diarrhea And Malabsorption


=== PDF p71 | printed 71 | images 2 ===
71
Constipation
Constipation is a common gastrointestinal condition characterized by infrequent
bowel movements and difficulty passing stool.
It happens when the intestines don't move waste to the rectum properly, and pelvic
muscles and anal sphincter don't coordinate well to expel stool.
Bases on the cause, constipation can be classified as
- Primary, also known as idiopathic or functional constipation.
- Secondary, which occurs as a side effect of some medications or due to another
medical condition, such as malignancy.
A focused history and physical examination including digital rectal examinations are
mandatory.
The patient will report a history of infrequent bowel movements, usually fewer than
three stools per week, as well as straining, hard stools, and a feeling of incomplete
evacuation.
Additionally, history might reveal abdominal discomfort or bloating, and sometimes
the patient might report the use of manual maneuvers to defecate.
Next, in patients with acute onset constipation, always ask about the ability to pass
gas, as failure to pass gas can signal bowel obstruction.
Other symptoms that point to obstruction include obstipation, which refers to
severe or complete constipation with practically no stool passage and absence of
flatus, and can be accompanied by abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.
By physical examination findings, which typically include fecal impaction and a
palpable stool ball.
Additionally, some patients may have anal fissures, hemorrhoids, or functional
problems like pelvic floor Dys-synergia, this is when the anal sphincter fails to relax
or the perineum does not descend when the patient bears down during evacuation.
Based on these history and physical exam findings, it's important to look for red flag
features that could indicate underlying serious conditions like malignancy.
Red flag features:
- Hematochezia
- Unintentional weight loss
- A family history of colorectal cancer
- Acute onset of constipation in an older adult
- Change in stool caliber
- Anemia
- The presence of a rectal mass.


=== PDF p72 | printed 72 | images 3 ===
72
If any of these red flag features are present, we should consider colorectal cancer
and proceed with an endoscopy, such as colonoscopy, with a biopsy to look for
obstructive lesions.
For patients with no red flag features, to assess for secondary causes of constipation.
Secondary causes:
- Medication side effects, commonly seen in patients taking opioid medications or
iron supplements.
- Endocrine or metabolic disorders like hypothyroidism, hypokalemia, or
hypercalcemia.
- Neurogenic conditions, such as spinal cord injury or multiple sclerosis.
In primary constipation a trial of empiric therapy, which includes increasing dietary
fiber or starting a fiber supplement, advising sedentary patients to increase their
physical activity, and starting an over-the-counter laxative, such as an osmotic agent
or a stimulant laxative.
If there is an adequate response to empiric therapy no further workup is needed.
On the other hand, if they have an inadequate response to empiric therapy,
additional testing will be mandatory as anorectal manometry and a balloon
expulsion test or defecography.
These tests measure pressures inside the rectum and anus and the ability of the
pelvic muscles to expel stool from the rectum.
These test are abnormal in defecatory disorder.
In this condition constipation arises from difficulty in evacuating stool from the
rectum.
MRI Defecography


=== PDF p73 | printed 73 | images 2 ===
73
However, if the anorectal manometry and balloon expulsion test are normal, a
colonic transit study will be recommended.
During colonic transit studies, patients swallow radioopaque markers, which are
then tracked through the gastrointestinal tract using X-rays.
If the markers are not passed within the expected time frame, then the test is
abnormal, so you can diagnose slow transit constipation.
On other side, if the colonic transit study results are normal, diagnose normal transit
constipation, which is also referred to as a disorder of the gut-brain axis.
There are different types of normal transit constipation.
One type is irritable bowel syndrome, which might be marked by alternating
episodes of diarrhea and constipation, or dominated by either symptom.
Functional Bowel disorders and Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome
Functional dyspepsia
Functional chest pain of presumed esophageal origin
Functional heartburn
characterized by chronic, recurrent symptoms of pain and discomfort referred to the
lower abdomen, the epigastrium and upper abdomen, and the retrosternum,
respectively.
They belong to the family of functional gastrointestinal (GI) disorders (also referred
to as disorders of brain-gut interactions) that comprise a wide spectrum of often
overlapping chronic GI disorders that are common in both the adult and pediatric
populations.


=== PDF p74 | printed 74 | images 3 ===
74
Irritable bowel syndrome or IBS
It is a chronic bowel condition characterized by recurrent abdominal pain associated
with abnormal bowel movements.
The cause is unknown but could be related to changes in the normal gut microbiota,
autonomic dysfunction, altered motility of the gastrointestinal tract, and
psychological factors.
Based on the clinical manifestations, IBS can be classified as subtypes:
- IBS-D ( Diarrhea predominant type )
- IBS-C (constipation-predominant type )
- IBS-M, that includes features of both IBS-D and C.
History findings typically include bowel habit changes for at least 6 months, which
are usually related to diarrhea or constipation.
The patient will also report abdominal pain or discomfort that‘s typically relieved
with defecation.
In some cases, bloating, or history of depression, anxiety, fibromyalgia, trauma, or
recent infectious gastroenteritis.
On the physical exam, abdominal tenderness and distention could be elicited.
Before diagnosis of IBS , we should exclude the presence of red flag features , these
includes:

Hematochezia

Unintentional weight loss

A family history of colon cancer

Acute onset of constipation in an older adult

Change in stool caliber

Anemia

The presence of a rectal mass.


=== PDF p75 | printed 75 | images 0 ===
75
If the red flag features are present , we should consider alternative diagnosis.
The next step is to order labs to rule out other non-malignant gastrointestinal
conditions with similar clinical manifestations , so the requested investigation will be:

CBC to assess for anemia or infection

Inflammatory markers like ESR and CRP to look for inflammation

TSH to assess for thyroid dysregulation

Tissue transglutaminase IgA for patient presenting with diarrhea to evaluate for
possible Celiac disease.

Fecal calprotectin to rule out colonic inflammation which may indicate
uncontrolled inflammatory bowel disease.
Diagnosis of IBS:
we should assess for Rome IV Criteria.
Which define IBS as recurrent abdominal pain that occurs at least 1 day per week in
the last 3 months, with at least two of the following criteria: the pain is related to
defecation, a change in stool frequency, or a change in stool form.
Management of IBS:
Diet modification, which includes consuming soluble fiber, and a trial of a diet low in
a specific set of carbohydrates, which is also known as the low FODMAP diet.
Some examples of foods that the patient should limit include potatoes, brown rice,
oats, and almonds.
The use of peppermint oil, has been shown to relax smooth muscle and target
spasming of the GI tract.
As well as tricyclic antidepressants, like amitriptyline or nortriptyline, which are
beneficial in relieving IBS associated abdominal pain.
Finally, gut-directed psychotherapy can be beneficial since IBS has a strong
association with mental health.
Probiotics are not prescribed as there is a lack of evidence supporting their efficacy .
For patients with the diarrhea-predominant type, the goal is to increase stool
firmness or decrease bowel movement frequency.
Treatment can be achieved by the non-absorbed antibiotic rifaximin, which works
by addressing bacterial growth associated with diarrhea.
On the other hand, there‘s the constipation-predominant type.
Treatment for these individuals is geared towards stool softening and increasing
bowel movement frequency.
There are two options available for treatment.
The first one includes chloride channel activators, like lubiprostone.
While the second one covers guanylate cyclase activators, like linaclotide which
help soften the stool and stimulate bowel movement.


=== PDF p76 | printed 76 | images 3 ===
76
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Definition
Chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract.
They are diagnosed by a set of clinical, endoscopic, and histologic characteristics,
but no single finding is absolutely diagnostic for one disease or the other.
Moreover, some patients have a clinical picture that falls between the two diseases
and are said to have indeterminate colitis.
Epidemiology
The highest rates occur in white populations in northern Europe and North America,
where the incidence for each disease is about 5 per 100,000 and the prevalence is
approximately 50 per 100,000.
The peak age at onset is between 15 and 25 years of age, with a second, lesser peak
between 55 and 65 years.
Pathology


=== PDF p77 | printed 77 | images 1 ===
77
Clinical features
Ulcerative Colitis
The dominant symptom in ulcerative colitis is diarrhea, which is usually associated
with blood in the stool.
Other symptoms include fever and pain, which may be in either lower quadrant or in
the rectum.
The initial attack of ulcerative colitis may be Fulminant with bloody diarrhea, but
more commonly the disease begins indolently, with non-bloody diarrhea progressing
to bloody diarrhea.
Crohn's Disease
Crohn's disease is marked by one of three major patterns:
(1) disease in the ileum and cecum (40% of patients).
(2) disease confined to the small intestine (30%).
(3) disease confined to the colon (25%).
The predominant symptoms are diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss.
In patients with colonic disease, especially with rectal involvement, diarrhea is of
small volume and associated with urgency and tenesmus.
Prolonged inflammation and scarring in the rectum can leave it so rigid and
nondistensible that the patient is incontinent.
In disease confined to the small intestine, stools are of larger volume and not
associated with urgency or tenesmus.
Patients with severe involvement of the terminal ileum and those who have
undergone surgical resection of the terminal ileum may have bile salt diarrhea or
steatorrhea.


=== PDF p78 | printed 78 | images 4 ===
78
Extra-intestinal Manifestations
Diagnosis
Laboratory Studies
A complete blood count (CBC), urinalysis, stool analysis and culture and serum
chemistry tests are appropriate during the initial evaluation.
Serologic examination of blood for specific antibodies , perinuclear antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA)[frequent in UC], antibodies to Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (ASCA) [frequent in CD].
A newly recognized and clinically useful inflammatory marker for UC disease activity
is fecal calprotectin, which is a protein secreted by neutrophils in the feces and is
therefore a marker of intestinal inflammation.
Barium enema and barium follow through
Endoscopy
Colonoscope of ulcerative colitis
Friable mucosa, extensive ulceration, and
exudates were detected.
Colonoscope of Crohn’s disease
A single aphthous ulcer, the
earliest endoscopic finding in
Crohn's disease
Multiple edematous
inflammatory polyps give a
“cobblestone” appearance to the
mucosa.


=== PDF p79 | printed 79 | images 2 ===
79
Differential diagnosis
Treatment
Diet and nutrition
Patients with mild symptomatic IBD usually are able to take food orally.
The diet should be nutritious.
Patients with Crohn's disease who have terminal ileal involvement and steatorrhea
may require supplemental fat-soluble vitamins, medium-chain triglycerides, and
parenteral vitamin B12.
Replacement iron may be indicated in patients who are iron-deficient.


=== PDF p80 | printed 80 | images 1 ===
80
Drugs

Sulfasalazine and amino

salicylates

Corticosteroids.

Antibiotics

Immunomodulators

Biologic therapy

Probiotics and prebiotics
Corticosteroids
Historically, corticosteroids have been used in patients with severe UC or Crohn's
disease to induce a remission.
Intravenous (IV) steroids (i.e., hydrocortisone 100 mg IV q6h or methyl prednisolone
10-30 mg IV q6-8h) are usually used in such patients.
When patients can take oral medications, prednisone at doses of 40 to 60 mg per
day is usually given.
Antibiotics
Bacteria is known to play an important role in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease
and it may play a role in UC.
In Crohn's diseases, the indications for the use of antibiotics include perianal disease,
localized peritonitis due to microperforation, bacterial overgrowth secondary to a
chronic stricture, and as an adjunct to drainage therapy for abscesses and fistulas.
Metronidazole ,Ciprofloxacin and Rifaximin can be used.
Immunomodulators and biologic therapy
Immunomodulator drugs act by blocking lymphocyte proliferation, activation, or
effector mechanisms.
Azathioprine Methotrexate Cyclosporin can be used.


=== PDF p81 | printed 81 | images 2 ===
81
Anti–Tumor Necrosis Factor Antibody (biologic therapy)
TNF is a key inflammatory cytokine and mediator of intestinal inflammation. The
expression of TNF is increased in IBD.
Infliximab is a chimeric mouse-human monoclonal antibody against TNF that is
effective in CD.
Novel Therapies
Anti-Adhesion Molecules
Adhesion molecules are important in cellular trafficking in IBD and other diseases,
in which immune and inflammatory cells from the periphery are recruited into sites
of inflammation.
Gut-selective anti-adhesion molecule, vedolizumab shows promising results.
Kinase Inhibitors
The Janus kinase (JAK) family of kinases, which include JAK1 and JAK3 which are
critical for lymphocyte proliferation, function, and activation.
Tofacitinib, a novel oral inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK3, was recently shown to be safe
and effective for the treatment of moderate to severe active UC.
Indications for surgical intervention


=== PDF p82 | printed 82 | images 0 ===
82
Complications
Toxic megacolon
Toxic megacolon is a condition in which the colon becomes atonic and dilated
because of transmural inflammation.
It is characteristically associated with severe ulcerative colitis, but it may complicate
any severe inflammatory condition of the bowel, including Crohn's disease, bacterial
colitis, amoebiasis, pseudomembranous colitis, and ischemic colitis.
Worsening of the patient's clinical condition and the development of fever,
tachycardia, and leukocytosis.
Medical therapy is designed to reduce the likelihood of perforation.
If the patient does not begin to show signs of clinical improvement during the first
24 to 48 hours of medical therapy, the risk for perforation increases markedly, and
surgical intervention is indicated.
Follow up for Malignancy
Patients with extensive ulcerative colitis have a markedly increased risk for colon
cancer in comparison to the general population beginning 8 to 10 years after
diagnosis and increasing with time.
There should be surveillance colonoscopy with random biopsies in patients with
long standing ulcerative colitis beginning 8 to 10 years after the onset of disease and
repeated every 1 to 2 years.
If the specimens show dysplasia the patient is sent for colectomy.
Ulcerative
Colitis
Crohn’s
Disease
Toxic
megacolon
Malignancy
Abscesses
and Fistulas
Obstruction
Perianal
Disease
