

=== PDF p1 | printed 1 | images 0 ===
Y M N O T E S M E D I C A L
Digestive
System
Hepatogastroenterology
Hepatogastrointestinal Surgery
Version 3
STUDY EDITION
Clear structure. Connected understanding.


=== PDF p2 | printed i | images 0 ===
D I G E S T I V E S Y S T E M / V E R S I O N 3
Interactive Contents
Tap a chapter to jump directly to it.
Chapters 01–20 · Page numbers refer to the book body.
01
GI Symptoms and Investigations
1
02
The Esophagus
10
03
The Stomach and Duodenum
33
04
Pathology of GIT Tumours
70
05
Diarrhea and Malabsorption
76
06
Constipation
95
07
Foodborn Infection
106
08
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
115
09
Parasitic GI Diseases
122
10
Small Intestine and Colon Surgery
140
11
Diverticulosis of the Colon
145
12
Appendix
151
13
Intestinal Obstruction
162
14
Polyposis of Colon
189
15
Colorectal Cancer
195
16
Anorectal Diseases
210
17
Hepatology and Hepatic Surgery
231
18
Liver Disease Assessment
236
19
Acute Hepatitis
251
20
Chronic Hepatitis B
264
Internal Medicine · Radiology / Investigation
Internal Medicine · Surgery
Internal Medicine · Pharmacology · Surgery
Pathology · Surgery
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine
Microbiology · Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine · Pharmacology
Parasitology
Surgery
Surgery · Internal Medicine
Surgery
Surgery · Emergency / Acute Care
Surgery · Pathology
Surgery · Pathology
Surgery
Surgery
Radiology / Investigation · Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine · Pharmacology


=== PDF p3 | printed ii | images 0 ===
D I G E S T I V E S Y S T E M / V E R S I O N 3
Interactive Contents
Tap a chapter to jump directly to it.
Chapters 21–40 · Page numbers refer to the book body.
21
Autoimmune Hepatitis
274
22
Liver Cirrhosis
280
23
Portal Hypertension
308
24
Hydatid Cyst
318
25
Pyogenic Liver Abscess
324
26
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
332
27
Ascites
337
28
Renal Impairment in Cirrhosis
345
29
Jaundice
349
30
Hepatic Encephalopathy
355
31
Acute Hepatic Failure
361
32
Biliary System Anatomy
367
33
Gallbladder Diseases
373
34
Gallstones and Cholecystitis
376
35
Obstructive Jaundice
389
36
Acute Pancreatitis
399
37
Cancer Pancreas
407
38
Acute Abdomen
413
39
Abdominal Trauma
418
40
Splenic Trauma
425
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine · Pathology
Internal Medicine · Surgery
Parasitology · Surgery
Surgery · Internal Medicine · Parasitology
Surgery · Pathology
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine
Internal Medicine · Emergency / Acute Care
Surgery
Surgery
Surgery
Surgery · Radiology / Investigation
Surgery · Emergency / Acute Care
Surgery · Pathology
Emergency / Acute Care · Surgery
Surgery · Emergency / Acute Care
Surgery · Emergency / Acute Care


=== PDF p4 | printed 1 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 1
Introduction
01
1
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p5 | printed 2 | images 1 ===
The student will
1) Know the various symptoms of gastrointestinal diseases
2) Understand the basic mechanism underlying each of the symptoms of
gastrointestinal tract
3) Understand the basic diagnostic tools for gastrointestinal diseases
Symptoms and signs of gastrointestinal diseases
NB: Patients with these features have a higher possibility of significant
gastrointestinal pathology and should be investigated properly.
Figure 1.1 — Alarm symptoms (red flag symptoms)
Learning objectives
Alarm symptoms- Red flag symptoms:
Dysphagia.
Weight loss.
Persistant vomiting.
Anorexia.
Haematemesis or melaena.
Stomatitis : It is an inflammation in the mouth from any cause.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
2
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p6 | printed 3 | images 0 ===
Diarrhea
Constipation
Angular stomatitis : is inflammation of the corners of the mouth .
Dysphagia : Difficulty of swallowing.
Odynophagia : Painful swallowing.
Dyspepsia : Describe a number of upper abdominal symptoms such as
heartburn, acidity, pain or discomfort, nausea, wind, fullness or belching.
Vomiting : causes of vomiting
Any Gastrointestinal disease.
Infections: viral and bacterial.
CNS diseases: Increase Intracranial pressure , migraine.
Metabolic causes : Chronic renal failure , diabetic Ketoacidosis.
Drugs : Digoxin.
Reflex : Myocardial infarction.
Psychogenic.
Pregnancy.
Alcohol.
Diarrhea & Constipation
Common complaint not always due to organic disease.
Defined as a change in bowel habit with:
Increase Frequency.
Increase Amount.
Decrease Consistency (loose/watery stool).
More than 200 g stool/day with low dietary fiber considered diarrhea.
Clinical:
Large-volume watery stool → usually organic cause
Bloody diarrhea → usually colonic pathology
Fever + acute diarrhea for several days → usually infective
Single episode → dietary change or psychogenic
Diagnosis is difficult because daily bowel opening is NOT required for
normal bowel habit.
Constipation = ≥2 of the following:
<3 stools/week.
Hard stools in >¼ of defecations.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
3
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p7 | printed 4 | images 0 ===
Mainly due to stretching of smooth muscle or organ capsules. Severe acute
pain consider acute abdomen ; may also be referred (pneumonia) or
metabolic (DKA).
Assess:
intensity, character, duration, frequency, aggravating/relieving factors &
associated symptoms.
Straining in >¼.
Incomplete evacuation in >¼.
Manual maneuvers (digital evacuation/pelvic floor support) in >¼.
Abdominal Pain:
Common Causes:
Epigastric: functional dyspepsia, Peptic ulcer ; heartburn ,GERD.
Right hypochondrium: biliary disease; hepatitis/cardiac failure.
Biliary pain: severe, intermittent, lasts hours, recurrent.
Left iliac fossa: diverticulitis; chronic pain often functional.
Right iliac fossa: appendicitis/ileocaecal disease.
Female : consider gynaecological causes.
Abdominal wall pain: localized tenderness, persistent pain not relieved by
tensing muscles.
Anorexia & Weight Loss:
Anorexia: reduced appetite; common in systemic /psychiatric disease. May
occur with cancer but is usually late and nonspecific.
Weight loss usually due to reduced intake; in malabsorption mainly due to
anorexia.
Weight loss despite normal or increased intake → hyperthyroidism / catabolic
states.
GIT Bleeding
Hematemesis: vomiting blood.
Melena: black, tarry stool → usually bleeding proximal to right colon; requires
>50 mL blood.
Massive upper GI bleed: fresh blood per rectum + shock.
Hematochezia: bright-red/maroon rectal bleeding → usually lower GI source.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
4
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p8 | printed 5 | images 0 ===
Investigations of gastrointestinal diseases
Investigations are selected according to the clinical presentation and include
laboratory tests, stool studies, endoscopy, and imaging.
Tumor markers are mainly supportive and are not diagnostic alone.
Upper GI Endoscopy (EGD)
Investigation of choice for most upper GI disorders.
1. Laboratory & Stool Investigations:
Routine blood tests: CBC, renal function, liver function.
Stool examination: useful for detecting blood, fat (steatorrhoea), parasites and
infection.
Fecal occult blood test (FOBT): detects non-visible GI bleeding.
Fecal Immunochemical test (FIT) : more accurate less false-positive results.
Fecal calprotectin elevated in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Tumor markers:
CEA → colorectal cancer
CA 19-9 → pancreaticobiliary cancer
AFP → hepatocellular carcinoma
2. Endoscopy:
Allows direct visualization, biopsy and treatment.
Diagnoses: reflux esophagitis, gastritis, ulcers and malignancy.
Therapeutic : treatment of upper GI bleeding and obstruction.
Relative contraindications :recent myocardial infarction and severe COPD.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
5
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p9 | printed 6 | images 3 ===
Figure 1.2 — Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
Colonoscopy
Figure 1.3 — Colonoscopy
Figure 1.4 — Colonoscope
Visualizes the entire colon and terminal ileum.
Allows biopsy, polypectomy, stricture dilatation and stenting.
Important findings include cancer, polyps and diverticular disease.
Sigmoidoscopy ( Rigid / Flexible ) : can be use in rectal bleeding.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
6
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p10 | printed 7 | images 1 ===
Small-Bowel Endoscopy
Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS)
Combines endoscopy with ultrasound.
Plain X-ray
Mainly useful in acute abdomen:
Figure 1.5 — Plain abdominal X-ray
Balloon enteroscopy: allows examination and treatment of the small bowel.
Capsule endoscopy: useful for obscure GI bleeding and small- bowel lesions/IBD
after negative gastroscopy and colonoscopy.
Useful for GI wall lesions, staging of esophageal/gastric cancer, and
detection/biopsy of pancreatic tumors and cysts.
3. Imaging
Bowel obstruction
Perforation (free subdiaphragmatic air)
Toxic megacolon
May show calcification from gallstones or chronic pancreatitis.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
7
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p11 | printed 8 | images 1 ===
Ultrasound
Figure 1.6 — Abdominal ultrasound
CT
A major first-line investigation in acute abdomen.
MRI
Advantages: no ionizing radiation and excellent soft-tissue contrast.
MR Enterography: small-bowel disease, particularly useful in IBD.
PET
Uses FDG metabolic activity to assess:
No radiation; first-line for many abdominal conditions.
Useful for ascites, masses, biliary disease, cholecystitis, appendicitis and
inflammatory conditions.
Can demonstrate bowel dilatation and wall thickening.
Allows image-guided biopsy and drainage.
Detects perforation, obstruction and its cause.
Demonstrates appendicitis, diverticulitis, abscesses and Crohn's
disease/complications.
Important for cancer staging and image-guided biopsy.
Assess renal function before IV contrast.
Particularly useful for rectal cancer, perianal fistulae/abscesses, small-bowel
disease, and hepatobiliary/pancreatic disorders.
Cancer staging
Metastatic disease
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
8
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p12 | printed 9 | images 0 ===
Useful in oesophageal, gastric and colorectal cancers.
4. Contrast Studies
Barium swallow: mainly for dysphagia and esophageal disorders.
Double-contrast barium meal: evaluates stomach and duodenum; largely
replaced by gastroscopy.
Barium enema: evaluates the colon but has largely been replaced by
colonoscopy and CT colonography.
If perforation is suspected → use water-soluble contrast (e.g. Gastrografin), not
barium.
GI SYMPTOMS AND INVESTIGATIONS
9
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p13 | printed 10 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 2
THE ESOPHAGUS
02
10
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p14 | printed 11 | images 1 ===
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOLOGY:
Figure 2.1 — Structure of the esophagus
The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) consists of a 2-4 cm in the distal end of the
esophagus that responsible for the prevention of gastric reflux.
SYMPTOMS OF ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS
1.Dysphagia:
CAUSES Causes of dysphagia
The esophagus is 20 cm long that connects the pharynx to the stomach.
The esophagus is lined by stratified squamous epithelium.
The esophagus is separated from the pharynx by the upper esophageal sphincter (UES).
Difficulty of swallowing.
The characteristics of the progression of dysphagia can be helpful Progression over a few
weeks suggests a malignant stricture. The slow onset of dysphagia for solids and liquids
at same time suggest motility disorder (e.g. Achalasia).
Disease of mouth and tongue e.g. tonsillitis .
Neuromuscular disorders e.g. Bulbar palsy , myasthenia gravis .
Esophageal motility disorders e.g. Achalasia ,Scleroderma ,diffuse esophageal spasm, Diabetes mellitus
, Chagas’ disease.
Extrinsic pressure e.g. Mediastinal glands , goiter ,enlarged left atrium
Intrinsic lesion e.g. Foreign body, Stricture: benign or malignant - carcinoma, esophageal web
,Pharyngeal pouch.
THE ESOPHAGUS
11
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p15 | printed 12 | images 1 ===
2.Odynophagia:
is pain during swallowing and is suggestive of esophagitis.
3.Substernal discomfort, heartburn:
This is a common symptom of reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus.
4.Regurgitation:
is the effortless reflux of esophageal contents into the mouth and pharynx.
SIGNS OF ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS
The main sign of esophageal disease is weight loss due to reduced food intake.
INVESTIGATIONS FOR ESOPHAGEAL DISORDERS
1. Esophagoscopy.
2. Barium swallow and meal.
3. Manometry
It is used to assess esophageal motor activity.
Figure 2.2 — Esophageal radiographic investigation
THE ESOPHAGUS
12
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p16 | printed 13 | images 2 ===
Figure 2.3 — Esophageal manometry
4. pH monitoring
- 24-hour ambulatory monitoring uses a pH-sensitive probe positioned in
the lower esophagus
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
(GERD)
Figure 2.4 — Gastroesophageal reflux disease
GASTROESOPHOGEAL REFLUX DISEAESE-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The reflux occur when the anti-reflux mechanisms fail, allowing acidic gastric contents to
make prolonged contact with the lower esophageal mucosa.
THE ESOPHAGUS
13
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p17 | printed 14 | images 1 ===
Figure 2.5 — Gastroesophageal reflux
COMPARE Esophageal reflux and cardiac ischemia
Decrease tone of lower esophageal sphincter (LES).
RISK FACTORS:
1) Increase intra-abdominal pressure : Pregnancy or obesity
2)Diet:
Fat, chocolate, coffee, alcohol and large meals.
3)Drugs:
antimuscarinic, calcium-channel blockers, nitrates
4) Cigarette smoking
5) Hiatus hernia ( described below )
CLINICAL FEATURES
Heartburn is the major feature.
The burning is aggravated by lying down and relieved by oral antacids.
Regurgitation of food and acid into the mouth.
Aspiration pneumonia
DIAGNOSIS AND INVESTIGATIONS
The clinical diagnosis can usually be made without investigation.
If there is alarm signs e.g. weight loss, no response to PPI the following investigations:
1) 24-hour pH monitoring.
2) Upper endoscopy.
3) Manometry.
Reflux pain: burning, worse on lying down , don’t
radiates to the arms ,worse with hot drinks or
alcohol and is relieved by antacids
Cardiac ischemic pain: Gripping or crushing
radiates to neck or left arm ,worse with exercise
accompanied by dyspnea
THE ESOPHAGUS
14
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p18 | printed 15 | images 1 ===
(ARMA):
Figure 2.6 — Anti-reflux mucosal ablation
TREATMENT
Simple measures :
Simple antacids.
Loss of weight and raising the head of the bed at night.
Reduction in caffeine consumption
Stop smoking and alcohol intake.
Drugs:
Proton pump inhibitors e.g. omeprazole, reduce gastric acid secretion and are the
drugs of choice for mild cases.
H2 Blockers e.g. ranitidine.
Antacids.
Dopamine antagonist as metoclopramide and domperidone are increase peristalsis
and speed emptying .
Endoluminal gastroplication:
This recent technique could be performed by endoscopy:
Endoscopic full-thickness plication (GERDX):
A endoscopic device has been designed to inhibit gastroesophageal reflux by
placing a transmural plication near the gastroesophageal junction under direct
endoscopic visualization.
Anti-reflux mucosal ablation
Mucosal ablation around the gastroesophageal junction to cause a healing
process to re-form the cardiac opening
Surgery: management of sliding hiatus hernia (described below )
COMPLICATIONS
Peptic stricture:
Since the introduction of PPIs peptic strictures have become less common.
Barrett’s esophagus :
The normal esophageal squamous epithelium is replaced by metaplastic
columnar mucosa.
THE ESOPHAGUS
15
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p19 | printed 16 | images 1 ===
Figure 2.7 — Esophageal epithelial changes
BENIGN ESOPHAGEAL STRICTURE
Premalignant: esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Barrett’s is commonest in middle-aged obese men.
Diagnosis: endoscopy, Chromo-endoscopy.
Treatment : Radiofrequency ablation (RFA).
Peptic stricture secondary to reflux is the most common cause of benign
strictures
They also occur after the ingestion of corrosives, after radiotherapy, after
sclerosis of varices.
Dysphagia is usually managed by endoscopic dilatation.
Surgery is sometimes required.
ESOPHAGEAL INFECTIONS
Infection is a cause of painful swallowing and is seen in immunosuppressed
(e.g. on chemotherapy) and AIDS.
Infection can occur with:
Candida - Herpes simplex - Cytomegalovirus - tuberculosis.
In candidiasis, the characterize by white plaques.
Most patients on large doses of immunosuppressive agents are treated
prophylactically for candida with nystatin or amphotericin.
THE ESOPHAGUS
16
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p20 | printed 17 | images 1 ===
-
HIATUS HERNIA-
Figure 2.8 — Hiatus hernia
3 subtypes:
Sliding hiatus hernia (85 %)
Rolling or Para- esophageal
hernia (10%):
A mixed type hiatus hernia
The gastro-oesophageal
junction (G O J), the abdominal
part of the oesophagus, and the
cardia of the stomach ‘slide’
upwards through the
diaphragmatic hiatus into the
thorax. ( fig. A )
An upward movement of the
gastric fundus through
esophageal hiatus occurs to lie
alongside a normally placed
GOJ. This is a true hernia with a
peritoneal sac. ( fig. B )
which has both a rolling and
sliding Components
A hiatus hernia describes the protrusion of an organ from the abdominal cavity into the
chest through the esophageal hiatus.
This is typically the stomach that herniates.
Extremely common disease.
Classification:
RISK FACTORS:
Age:
1. Is an important risk factor, due to:
A combination of age- related loss of diaphragmatic tone, increasing intra-
abdominal pressures (e.g. repetitive coughing), and widening of diaphragmatic
hiatus.
Increased intra-abdominal pressure:
2. Pregnancy, obesity, and ascites due to upwards displacement of the abdominal
viscera.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF SLIDING H.H.:
The majority of hiatus hernias are asymptomatic.
THE ESOPHAGUS
17
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p21 | printed 18 | images 1 ===
epigastric pain:
2) Vomiting – regurgitation.
3) Bleeding and anemia secondary to esophageal ulceration leading either
melena, occult blood in stool or hematemesis in severe cases.
4) Dysphagia (esophageal stricture on long-standing cases)
5) Sometimes Weight loss in case of long duration vomiting and dyspepsia.
1.Upper endoscopy :
2. Plain x-ray chest:
fundic air may be evident in the chest – detects chest complications as
aspiration pneumonia.
Figure 2.9 — CXR: stomach in the chest
3. Barium swallow:
Gastro-esophageal reflux symptoms:
1) Marked burning
Made worse by lying flat and on leaning forwards.
Patient experiences relief on raising head of bed.
Epigastric tenderness in case of associated gastritis
INVESTIGATIONS:
Is the standard investigation for esophageal disorders showing upward
displacement of the Gastro-Esophageal Junction also (Z-line).
During inspiration the GOJ is opened and closed in expiration
It shows evidence of reflux as hyperemia, fissuring, ulceration or stricture of the
lower esophagus
Biopsy may be taken from suspicious areas (areas of Barett’s)
Evidence of complication as stricture esophagus.
THE ESOPHAGUS
18
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p22 | printed 19 | images 1 ===
4. Barium meal in Trendlenberg’s position:
5. CT abdomen and chest
6. pH test:
shows increased acid level in the esophagus.(diagnostic for reflux)
Barium meal: sliding H.H
Figure 2.10 — Barium meal: sliding hiatus hernia
Reflux of the barium to the esophagus in GERD
Stomach above the diaphragm in big Hiatus Hernia.
TREATMENT:
Life-style changes as:
Losing weight.
Decreasing the size of meals.
Avoiding certain acidic foods, such as tomato sauce and citrus
Limiting fried and fatty foods, foods containing caffeine (including chocolate), •
Eating meals at least three to four hours before lying down, and avoiding
bedtime snacks • Keeping head higher than the rest of body when lying on the
back.
Stop smoking
Avoid a tight belt or tight clothing.
Medications:
Antacids that neutralize stomach acid.
H2 blockers.
Proton pump inhibitors.
PPI stronger acid blockers than H₂ blockers and allow for damaged esophageal
tissue to heal.
THE ESOPHAGUS
19
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p23 | printed 20 | images 1 ===
Aim to restore the intra-abdominal length of the esophagus, repair the
diaphragmatic defect, and recreate a functional lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) barrier.
Indications for Surgery
Operative repair is recommended for all symptomatic patients
Principles of Surgical Management
Laparoscopic repair is the gold standard approach:
1. Hernia Sac Reduction & Dissection
2. Hiatal Closure (Cruroplasty)
• Close the enlarged diaphragmatic hiatus posteriorly using non-absorbable
sutures. Synthetic or biological mesh reinforcement may be used in large defects
to reduce recurrence.
3. Anti-Reflux Procedure (Fundoplication)
Wrap the gastric fundus around the distal esophagus to recreate the high-
pressure zone:
Figure 2.11 — Fundoplication
Surgical management of GERD and hiatal hernia
1. Failure of medical treatment for type I
2. due to the risk of volvulus, strangulation, and ischemia. In type II
Complete excision of the mediastinal sac
Reduce the herniated stomach into the abdomen and
completely mobilize and excise the hernia sac from the posterior mediastinum.
Reapproximating diaphragmatic crura
Nissen Fundoplication: 360° total wrap (gold standard)
Toupet Fundoplication: 270° posterior partial wrap
(preferred if underlying esophageal dysmotility exists to minimize post-
operative dysphagia).
THE ESOPHAGUS
20
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p24 | printed 21 | images 0 ===
Postoperative Complications :
Vagal degeneration
CAUSES OF ACHALASIA:
I- Primary Achalasia:
Etiology unknown, Hereditary, degenerative, autoimmune
II- Secondary Achalasia:
(e.g. secondary to Chaga’s disease)
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS:
COMPLICATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH ACHALASIA:
Pneumonic Aspiration
Esophageal cancer
1) Acute Dysphagia: tight wrap, or tight crural closure
Treatment: Soft diet for 2–4 weeks. If persistent beyond 6 weeks, perform
endoscopic balloon dilation.
2) Gas-Bloat Syndrome : Inability to belch/vomit due to hypercompetent 360°
wrap treatment: Dietary modification, simethicone, and reassurance; resolves
spontaneously in most patients.
3) Early Hernia Recurrence / Wrap Slippage
Treatment: revision surgery
4) Recurrent GERD : Breakdown or migration of the wrap into the chest
Treatment: revision surgery.
ACHALASIA OF ESOPHAGUS-
It is a primary esophageal motility disorder characterized by failure of LES
relaxation and loss of peristalsis in the distal esophagus.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY:
LES contraction and relaxation are regulated through vagus nerve
Degeneration of ganglion cells in myenteric plexus concerned with the
inhibitory neurons → increased tone in LES → severe spasm.
Dysphagia for liquids more than solids most significant symptom. (effect of
weight). • Difficulty Belching.
Regurgitation (especially when lying flat at night)
Heartburn and Chest Pain in case of esophagitis
Weight loss is minimal and late
Hiccups
THE ESOPHAGUS
21
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p25 | printed 22 | images 3 ===
INVESTIGATIONS:
I- Radiographic Evaluation
II- Manometric Evaluation
III- Endoscopic Evaluation
I- Radiographic Evaluation
1- Chest x-ray:
2- Barium swallows: diagnostic tool
Figure 2.12 — Smooth narrowing of the distal esophagus at the level of the lower esophageal sphincter
with the characteristic “bird beak” appearance.
Figure 2.13 — Radiographic findings in achalasia
II- Esophageal manometry: confirm the diagnosis
Markedly dilated Esophagus with widening of mediastinum
Absent gastric air bubble: swallowed air does not reach the fundus
The proximal esophagus is markedly dilated
Absent gastric air bubble
Elevated resting LES pressure (spasm).
Incomplete LES relaxation.
Weak peristalsis of esophageal wall (aperistalsis).
THE ESOPHAGUS
22
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p26 | printed 23 | images 2 ===
III- Endoscopic Evaluation:
Pharmacological agents:
Patients who are unable to tolerate more invasive treatment modalities.
1- Calcium channel blockers and nitrates decrease LES pressure.
2- Endoscopic Intra-sphincteric Injection of Botulinum Toxin:
Endoscopic technics
A- Pneumatic dilatation:
Figure 2.14 — Pneumatic dilatation
B- The Per-Oral Endoscopic Myotomy, or
POEM, :
Figure 2.15 — Per-oral endoscopic myotomy
To exclude cancer of the gastro-esophageal junction.
Detects spasm of the LES.
MANAGEMENT:
blocks release of acetylcholine at the level of the LES → relaxation of the
sphincter
Is the most effective non-surgical treatment option for patients with achalasia.
The balloon is inflated at the level of the gastro-esophageal junction to dilate the
muscle fibers while leaving the mucosa intact.
is a minimally invasive endoscopic procedure for the treatment of achalasia
wherein the inner circular muscle layer of the lower esophageal sphincter is
divided through a submucosal tunnel.
THE ESOPHAGUS
23
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p27 | printed 24 | images 0 ===
Surgical: Laparoscopic Heller’s Cardio-Myotomy
Combined with Partial Fundoplication: Always paired with a partial
fundoplication to prevent postoperative reflux.
c) Refractory / End-Stage (Megaesophagus ): Esophagectomy with gastric
conduit reconstruction.
Esophageal dysphagia
Primarily caused by
1. Mechanical obstructions
2. Neuromuscular motility disorders.
1) Esophageal Carcinoma: Progressive dysphagia starting with solids and rapidly
advancing to liquids, accompanied by weight loss (Squamous Cell Carcinoma or
Adenocarcinoma).
2) Peptic Stricture: Benign narrowing of the distal oesophagus resulting from
chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and scarring.
3) Esophageal Webs: constrict the lumen and are often associated with Plummer-
Vinson syndrome.
4) Extrinsic Compression: Pressure on the esophagus from outside structures,
such as a mediastinal tumor, aortic aneurysm, or retrosternal goiter.
5) Foreign Body Impaction: Sudden onset of complete dysphagia
6) Esophageal Diverticula: Outpouchings like Zenker’s (pharyngoesophageal),
traction, or epiphrenic diverticula that trap food and cause regurgitation.
7) Corrosive Stricture: Severe scarring following ingestion of caustic agents or
prior mediastinal radiotherapy.
These functional disorders impair peristalsis or lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) relaxation, often causing equal dysphagia for both solids and liquids
from the onset:
1) Achalasia: Failure of the LES to relax alongside absent peristalsis due to
degeneration of the myenteric plexus.
Weakens LES by cutting muscle fibers through performing an anterior
myotomy across the LES.
I- Mechanical Causes
These conditions physically narrow the esophageal lumen, leading
predominantly to dysphagia for solids before progressing to liquids:
II- Neuromuscular / Motility Causes
THE ESOPHAGUS
24
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p28 | printed 25 | images 0 ===
2) Distal Oesophageal Spasm (DES): Uncoordinated, high-amplitude contractions
causing intermittent dysphagia and chest pain.
3) Hypercontractile Oesophagus: Severe, high-pressure muscular contractions
during peristalsis.
4) Systemic Sclerosis (Scleroderma): Atrophy of smooth muscle leading to an
incompetent LES and severe aperistalsis.
A definitive diagnosis for esophageal dysphagia relies on a clinical history to
endoscopy, radiology, and functional/motility testing.
Step 1: Detailed Clinical History
Step 2: Upper Endoscopy (EGD) — The Initial Diagnostic Procedure
Step 3: Barium swallow
Step 4: Oesophageal Manometry: Gold Standard for Motility
Step 5: Advanced Imaging (CT / Endoscopic Ultrasound EUS)
Used when extrinsic compression or advanced local pathology is suspected
Surgical management of esophageal disorders
Surgical management of esophageal dysphagia depends entirely on whether the
primary etiology is a mechanical obstruction, a motility disorder, or an external
pathology.
1. Mechanical Obstructive Lesions: Esophageal Carcinoma
2. Benign Strictures (Peptic / Corrosive / Radiation)
•First-line / Endoscopic : Serial endoscopic balloon dilation or wire-guided
bougie dilation.
• Refractory Strictures: Endoscopic steroid injection into the stricture,
temporary stent placement, or formal esophageal resection and reconstruction
(colon interposition or gastric pullup) for complete caustic destruction.
3. Esophageal Webs & Rings
• Primary Treatment: Endoscopic rupture using balloon dilation or targeted
electrosurgical incision (using specialized knife).
4. Distal Esophageal Spasm & Hypercontractile Esophagus
• Endoscopic (POEM): Extended Peroral Endoscopic Myotomy targeting the long
spastic segment in the mid-todistal esophagus when medical therapy fails.
KEY HIGHLIGHTS diagnostic strategy to identify the most common mechanical and
neuromuscular causes:
THE ESOPHAGUS
25
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p29 | printed 26 | images 0 ===
5. Zenker’s Diverticulum (Pharyngoesophageal)
6. Extrinsic Compression & Emergency Impactions
• Extrinsic Tumors / Goiters: Surgical resection of the compressive mediastinal
mass or thyroidectomy for retrosternal goiter.
• Foreign Body: Emergent endoscopic removal using snare, basket, or grasping
forceps; surgical exploration is reserved solely for cases complicated by
perforation.
Cancer Esophagus
Age: old age > 50 years
Sex: males > females
Macroscopic picture:
2- Lower 1/3 → 33 %
3- Upper 1/3 → 10: 15 %
Gross appearance:
1. Malignant ulcer: raised evereted edge, hard base and necrotic floor
2. Stricture: hard, long and irregular
3. Fungating mass: cauliflower, bleeding and necrotic surface
Endoscopic Approach (Transoral): Diverticulectomy using stapling, laser, or
electrocautery (flexible or rigid endoscopic cricopharyngeal myotomy).
open Surgical Approach: Cricopharyngeal myotomy combined with
diverticulectomy (excision of the pouch)
Pathology:
Predisposing factors:
Dietetic: spicy foods
Excessive alcohol intake – smoking
Achalasia
Long standing reflux esophagitis
Barret’s esophagus (most important P.F)
Corrosive stricture of the esophagus
Site: 1- Middle 1/3 → 50 % (COMMONEST)
THE ESOPHAGUS
26
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p30 | printed 27 | images 1 ===
Microscopic picture:
1. Squamous cell carcinoma:
2. Adenocarcinoma:
Spread:
A. local :
Figure 2.16 — Local spread
A.Lymphatics:
to regional L.N. according to the level:
B. Blood :
late: to lung – liver – bone – brain.
Lower third may give early liver metastasis (portal)
The most common
Grade: may be well , moderate or undifferentiated carcinoma o
On top of Barett’s esophagus
Local spread from gastric carcinoma at the cardia to lower esophagus.
the tumor spread in vertical and horizontal (circumferentially)
Vertical spread from the mucosa to submucosa to muscle layer to adventitia then
penetrate to the surrounding structures as trachea, bronchus, pleura,
diaphragm, stomach,….
Cervical L.N. from upper 1/3
Hilar and Mediastinal L.N. from the middle 1/3
Left gastric and celiac L.N. from the lower 1/3
THE ESOPHAGUS
27
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p31 | printed 28 | images 0 ===
General symptoms and signs:
Local Symptoms:
1) Dysphagia:
2) Regurgitation → leads to recurrent aspirations and chest infections
3) Hematemesis:
bleeding malignant tissues.
I.Upper endoscopy:
the most valuable and diagnostic
May show malignant ulcer, hard irregular stricture or cauliflower mass
Biopsy is taken for histo-pathology: Confirms the diagnosis.
A stent may be introduced to relieve dysphagia (palliative).
III- Radiological:
1. Barium swallow:
Clinical picture:
Marked progressive weight loss up to cachexia of rapid onset
Enlarged cervical L.N. in upper third cancer
Anemia
Symptoms of spread as recurrent aspiration in tracheal infiltration, pleural
effusion
Old aged male – history of P.F. as GERD
Presented when about 2/3 of the circumference is involved by the tumor
Progressive and continuous
First to solids than progresses to fluids as well then event to saliva
Dribbling of saliva (severe form of dysphagia).
Investigations:
Endo-luminal ultrasound:
To detect infiltration of the tumor within and outside the wall of esophagus to
surrounding structure.
Detects resectability and operability
It may show irregular filling defect.
It may show signs of malignant stricture: elongated, irregular narrowing,
characteristic shouldering and dilatation of the proximal esophagus (Rat-tail
appearance)
THE ESOPHAGUS
28
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p32 | printed 29 | images 1 ===
Figure 2.17 — Barium swallow shows irregular stricture and filling defect
2. C.T. scan abdomen and chest:
for staging of the tumor
IV- LAB.:
Usually the prognosis is bad as the diagnosis is usually late
Treatment options:
1- Palliative 2- Radical Surgery
Palliative treatments:
to relieve dysphagia (temporary effects)
Indications: advanced cases – bad general conditions
a)Intubation:
Insertion of metal stent inside the strictured segment to create a path for feeding
Introduced by endoscopy
Examples: Celestin and Souttar tubes
Detect local spread and infiltration of surrounding structures
Detect metastases in the liver, lungs
Detect enlarged celiac L.N.
Detects mediastinal L.N.
Detects pleural effusion
Evaluates the stage, operability and resectability
CBC – Liver, kidney functions to evaluate the general condition and fitness
for surgery.
Treatment:
THE ESOPHAGUS
29
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p33 | printed 30 | images 3 ===
Figure 2.18 — Esophageal stent placement
b)YAG LASER:
Photocoagulation induces coagulation inside the strictured segment to create a
path
c) Palliative surgery:
Gastrostomy or jejunostomy used for feeding:
Figure 2.19 — Feeding gastrostomy
Figure 2.20 — Gastrostomy and jejunostomy
THE ESOPHAGUS
30
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p34 | printed 31 | images 0 ===
d) Radiotherapy
-A. Early Stage Disease (T1):
B. Locally Advanced but Resectable Disease:
Management differs significantly based on pathology:
1.Esophageal Adenocarcinoma (EAC):
2.Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (ESCC):
Techniques:
Radical surgery:
Curative surgery – used in early cancer and good general condition. Aim:
resection of the tumor with safety margin and restore continuity .
Updated multimodal management
Endoscopic Resection: Endoscopic Mucosal Resection (EMR) or Endoscopic Submucosal
Dissection (ESD) is curative for intramucosal (T1) disease without lymphovascular invasion,
followed by radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of surrounding Barrett’s mucosa.
Preferred Standard: Perioperative chem & immunotherapy + surgery.
Preferred Standard: Neoadjuvant Chemoradiation followed by surgery.
Surgical Approaches (Esophagectomy):
Ivor Lewis Esophagectomy : Transthoracic approach (right thoracotomy + laparotomy)
with gastric conduit reconstruction.
McKeown Esophagectomy: Three-incision approach (neck, chest, abdomen) for upper
or mid-thoracic lesions
Transhiatal Esophagectomy: Abdominal and cervical incisions without formal
thoracotomy.
THE ESOPHAGUS
31
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p35 | printed 32 | images 1 ===
Figure 2.21 — Esophagectomy and gastric reconstruction
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
THE ESOPHAGUS
32
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p36 | printed 33 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 3
THE STOMACH AND
DUODENUM
03
33
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p37 | printed 34 | images 1 ===
By the end of this chapter, the medical student will be able to:
1. Analyze the clinical manifestations, diagnostic approach, and management of
acid- related gastric and duodenal diseases.
2. Evaluate the clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment of peptic ulcer
disease (PUD).
3. Formulate modern diagnostic pathways and eradication regimens for
Helicobacter pylori.
4. Identify clinical manifestations, diagnostic approaches, and surgical
indicators for PUD complications.
5. Manage acute and chronic gastrointestinal bleeding.
6. Recognize the clinical presentation, diagnosis, and staging of gastric
carcinoma.
Anatomy and Physiology
The stomach consists of five distinct anatomical regions:
The stomach is bordered by two main functional sphincters: the
gastroesophageal sphincter and the pyloric sphincter.
Figure 3.1 — Structure of the stomach
Learning Objectives
Gastric Anatomy
Cardia: Adjacent to the gastroesophageal junction.
Fundus: Dome-shaped region extending above and to the left of the cardia,
toward the left hemidiaphragm.
Body (Corpus): Extends from the fundus to the lower end of the lesser curve,
known as the incisura angularis.
Antrum: Extends from the incisura angularis to the pyloric canal.
Pylorus: The muscular region between the antrum and the duodenum.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
34
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p38 | printed 35 | images 0 ===
CLINICAL PEARL: Gastric Secretory Regulation
The stomach also serves as a protective mucosal barrier composed of cell plasma
membranes and a heavy mucus-bicarbonate layer. This barrier shields the
epithelium against auto-digestion by acid, pepsin, and ingested irritants
(aspirin, NSAIDs, alcohol, and bile salts). Local prostaglandins (PGE2) are critical
to maintaining this barrier by stimulating mucus and bicarbonate synthesis.
Gastritis
Gastritis: Gastritis is inflammation of the gastric mucosa, usually diagnosed
histologically, and may result from infectious, immune, chemical, or drug-
related causes.
Note: Gastritis and gastropathy are not mutually exclusive and frequently
coexist in clinical practice.
Acute Gastritis
Acute gastritis refers to a sudden onset of mucosal inflammation. A disruption in
the mucosal barrier triggers an immune response that recruits neutrophils
(polymorphonuclear leukocytes) to the site of injury. Severe mucosal damage
can progress to acute erosive gastritis, featuring shallow mucosal lesions
(erosions), ulcerations, and focal intraluminal bleeding.
Histological Structure and Secretions
Upper Two-Thirds (Fundus and Body): The mucosa contains parietal cells that
secrete hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor, and chief cells that secrete
pepsinogen to initiate proteolysis.
Lower One-Third (Antrum): The antral mucosa contains mucus-secreting cells, G
cells (which secrete gastrin to stimulate acid production), and D cells (which
secrete somatostatin, a potent suppressant of acid secretion).
Duodenal Mucosa: Features villi and contains Brunner's glands that secrete
alkaline mucus. This secretion, alongside pancreatic and biliary inputs,
neutralizes acidic gastric chyme entering the duodenum.
Acid secretion is under tight neural and hormonal control.
Acetylcholine (vagal stimulation) and Gastrin stimulate acid production directly,
and indirectly by releasing histamine from enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells.
Somatostatin acts as a primary negative feedback brake, inhibiting both
histamine and gastrin release.
Definition
Gastropathy: A gastric mucosal disorder featuring epithelial injury and
subsequent regeneration without associated histological inflammation.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
35
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p39 | printed 36 | images 0 ===
Most individuals are asymptomatic or experience mild upper abdominal
discomfort, loss of appetite, belching, nausea, and vomiting. Severe erosive
cases can present acutely with upper gastrointestinal bleeding (hematemesis
or melena).
Diagnosis begins with a thorough medical history to pinpoint specific triggers
(such as chronic NSAID use or alcohol intake). Because acute gastritis is
typically short-lived and self-resolving, removing the offending trigger is
often sufficient. If bleeding occurs or the diagnosis remains uncertain, an
Upper Endoscopy (EGD) is indicated to visualize the mucosa and obtain
biopsy samples.
Acid suppression via Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs) or Potassium-Competitive
Acid Blockers (PCABs) effectively aids symptom relief and accelerates mucosal
healing.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
NSAIDs and Aspirin: Inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX-1), blocking the synthesis
of prostaglandin E2. This depletes protective gastric mucus and increases
baseline acid output.
Critical Illness (Stress Ulcers): Extreme physiological stress—such as major
surgery, severe trauma, massive burns (Curling ulcers), or central nervous
system injury (Cushing ulcers)—induces mucosal ischemia.
Exogenous Irritants: Elevated intake of alcohol, heavy caffeine consumption,
and exposure to cigarette smoke directly irritate and inflame the gastric mucosa.
Infectious: The early, acute phase of an Helicobacter pylori infection.
Signs and Symptoms
Diagnosis and Management
Gastritis and NSAIDs
Aspirin and other NSAIDs deplete mucosal prostaglandins by inhibiting the
cyclo-oxygenase (COX) pathway, which leads to mucosal damage.
Cyclo-oxygenase occurs in two main forms: COX-1, the constitutive enzyme, and
COX-2, inducible by cytokine stimulation in areas of inflammation.
COX-2 specific inhibitors have less effect on the COX-1 enzyme in the gastric
mucosa. It still produce gastric mucosal damage but less than with other
conventional NSAIDs. -Because of the large number of patients on NSAIDs
including low-dose aspirin for vascular prophylaxis, this is a significant
problem, particularly in the elderly.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
36
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p40 | printed 37 | images 1 ===
Figure 3.2 — Mechanism of action of traditional NSAID and anti COX-2 inhibitors
Prophylactic cytoprotective therapy, e.g. PPI or misoprostol (a synthetic
analogue of prostaglandin for all high-risk patients, i.e. over 65 years; those with
a peptic ulcer history, particularly with complications, and patients on therapy
with corticosteroids or anticoagulants. PPIs reduce the risk of endoscopic
duodenal and gastric ulcers and are better tolerated than misoprostol, which
causes diarrhoea.
1. Discontinue the offending NSAID immediately whenever clinically feasible.
2. Initiate daily healing doses of a PPI.
3. If chronic NSAID therapy cannot be stopped due to severe comorbidities (e.g.,
severe arthritis), transition the patient to the lowest effective dose, consider a
selective COX-2 inhibitor, and co-prescribe daily cytoprotective prophylaxis via a
PPI or Misoprostol (a synthetic prostaglandin E₂ analogue).
Treatment
Stop the ingestion of NSAIDs.
A PPI should be given. -H. pylori eradication therapy if H. pylori positive.
In many people with severe arthritis, stopping NSAIDs may not be possible,
therefore use: -A NSAID with low GI side-effects at lowest dose possible or if
there is no cardiovascular risk, a COX-2 NSAID can be used
Management of NSAID-Induced Ulcers
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
37
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p41 | printed 38 | images 0 ===
Chronic Gastritis
Chronic gastritis involves long-standing, persistent inflammation of the gastric
mucosa. It is characterized histologically by a lymphocytic and plasma cell
infiltrate, and is broadly divided into two major distinct pathological types:
It affects the body and fundus of the stomach; and it represents an example of
a type IV hypersensitivity. In chronic autoimmune gastritis, there are
autoantibodies against H+/K+ ATPase on parietal cells and intrinsic factor.
Autoantibodies against H+/K+ ATPase decrease gastric acid secretion, thereby
causing hypochlorhydria, which is associated with impaired iron absorption
and hyperplasia of gastrin cells. As a result, there’s an increased secretion of
gastrin, hypergastrinemia, which is a hormone that has a trophic effect on
enterochromaffin-like cells, or ECL cells; therefore, these individuals are at
risk for developing neuroendocrine tumors.
Autoantibodies against intrinsic factor lead to decreased absorption of vitamin
B12, resulting in pernicious anemia.
Finally, in chronic autoimmune gastritis chief cells are also lost and this results
in decreased levels of serum pepsinogen. Diagnosis of chronic autoimmune
gastritis includes endoscopic biopsy, but also detection of anti-parietal cell
antibodies, anti- IF antibodies; and levels of serum gastrin and pepsinogen
Chronic autoimmune Gastritis
Helicobacter Pylori Gastritis
Chronic autoimmune gastritis,
Helicobacter pylori Gastritis
H. pylori is a slow-growing spiral Gram-negative flagellate urease-producing bacterium
which plays a major role in gastritis and peptic ulcer disease.
It colonizes the mucous layer in the gastric antrum, but is also found in the duodenum in
areas of gastric metaplasia.
Antral gastritis is the usual effect of H. pylori infection. It is usually asymptomatic,
although patients without ulcers do sometimes experience relief of dyspeptic symptoms
after Helicobacter eradication. Chronic antral gastritis causes hypergastrinaemia due to
gastrin release from antral G cells. The subsequent increase in acid output is usually
asymptomatic, but can lead to duodenal ulceration
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
38
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p42 | printed 39 | images 1 ===
Figure 3.3 — H Pylori gastritis
Epidemiology
The prevalence of H. pylori is high in developing countries (80-90% of the
population), and much lower (20-50%) in developed countries.
Pathogenesis
Infection rates are highest in lower income groups. Infection is usually acquired
in childhood; although the exact route is uncertain, it may be fecal-oral or oral-
oral. The incidence increases with age.
The pathogenetic mechanisms are not fully understood, with the majority of the colonized
population remaining asymptomatic throughout their life.
H. pylori is highly adapted to the stomach environment, exclusively colonizing gastric
epithelium and inhabiting the mucous layer, or just beneath.
The production of urease enables the conversion of urea to ammonium and chloride, which are
directly cytotoxic.
Ulcers are commonest when the infecting strain expresses CagA (cytotoxic-associated protein)
and VacA (vacuolating toxin) genes secondary to a more pronounced inflammatory and
immune response
The precise mechanism of duodenal ulceration is unclear, as only 15% of patients infected with
H. pylori (50-60% of the adult population worldwide) develop duodenal ulcers.
Factors that have been implicated include: increased gastrin secretion, smoking, bacterial
virulence and genetic susceptibility.
Gastric ulcer (GU) : Gastric ulcers are associated with a gastritis affecting the body as well as
the antrum of the stomach (pangastritis) causing parietal cell loss and reduced acid
production. The ulcers are thought to occur because of reduction of gastric mucosal resistance
due to cytokine production by the H pylori infection or perhaps to alterations in gastric mucus.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
39
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p43 | printed 40 | images 1 ===
Other H. pylori associated diseases:
Diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori infection
Diagnosis of H. pylori is necessary if the clinician plans to treat a positive
result. This is usually in the context of active peptic ulcer disease, previous
peptic ulcer disease or
MALT lymphoma, or to ‘test and treat’ patients with dyspepsia under the age of
55 with no alarm symptoms (i.e. weight loss, anemia, dysphagia, vomiting, or
family history of gastrointestinal cancer).
Non-invasive methods
■ Stool antigen test. This is beginning to be the method of choice to determine
the H. pylori status. A specific immunoassay using monoclonal antibodies for
the qualitative detection of H. pylori antigen is now widely available. The overall
sensitivity and specificity is over 95% . It is useful in the diagnosis of H. pylori
infection and for monitoring efficacy of eradication therapy. Patients should be
off PPIs for 2 weeks but can continue with H2 blockers.
■ 13 C Urea breath test . This is a quick and reliable test for H. pylori and can be
used as a screening test. The measurement of 13 CO 2 in the breath after
ingestion of 13 C urea . The test requires a mass spectrometer. The test is
sensitive (90%) and specific (96%), but the sensitivity can be improved by
insuring the patient has not taken antibiotics in the 4 weeks prior and proton
pump inhibitors in the 2 weeks before the test.
■ Serological tests detect IgG antibodies are reasonably sensitive (90%) and
specific
(83%). They have been used in diagnosis and in epidemiological studies. IgG
titres may take up to 1 year to fall by 50% after eradication therapy and therefore
are not useful for confirming eradication or the presence of a current infection.
Figure 3.4 — Urea breath test for detection of H pylori
Gastric adenocarcinoma. The incidence of distal (but not proximal) gastric cancer
parallels that of H. pylori infection in countries with a high incidence of gastric cancer.
Serological studies show that people infected with H. pylori have a higher incidence of
distal gastric carcinoma (Gastric B cell lymphoma) . Over 70% of patients with gastric B
cell lymphomas (mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue - MALT) have H. pylori.
H. pylori gastritis has been shown to contain the clonal B cell that eventually gives rise to
the MALT lymphoma.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
40
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p44 | printed 41 | images 0 ===
Invasive (endoscopy)
■ Biopsy urease test. Gastric biopsies, usually antral are added to a substrate
containing urea and phenol red. If H. pylori are present, the urease enzyme that
they produce splits the urea to release ammonia which raises the pH of the
solution and causes a rapid colour change (yellow to red). This enables a
patient’s H. pylori status to be determined before they leave the endoscopy unit.
The test may be falsely negative if patients are taking PPIs or antibiotics.
■ Histology. H. pylori can be detected histologically on routine (Giemsa) stained
sections of gastric mucosa obtained at endoscopy.
■ Culture. Biopsies obtained can be cultured on a special medium, and in vitro
sensitivities to antibiotics can be tested. This technique is typically used for
patients with refractory H. pylori infection to identify the appropriate antibiotic
regimen and routine culture is rare.
Eradication therapy
Proton pump inhibitor or PCAB twice / day + Amoxicillin 1g twice / day +
clarithromycin 500 mg twice /day . Treatment was given for 14 days.
However due to global clarithromycin resistance, classic standard triple therapy
is no longer recommended as an empirical first-line choice unless local
resistance is confirmed to be low.
1. Bismuth Quadruple Therapy (Preferred First-Line Choice)
2. PCAB Dual Therapy
3. Rescue Therapy
In developing countries reinfection is common, compliance with treatment may
be poor and metronidazole resistance is high (>50%) as it is frequently used for
parasitic infections), so failure of eradication is common
Acid Suppressant : Standard-dose PPI twice daily or Vonoprazan (PCAB) 20 mg
twice daily.
Bismuth Subcitrate : 120–300 mg four times daily.
Tetracycline : 500 mg four times daily.
Metronidazole : 250–500 mg four times daily.
Duration : 10–14 days
Vonoprazan : 20 mg twice daily.
Amoxicillin : 1g three times daily ( total 3g/day).
Duration : 14 days.
Implements quinolones (e.g., Levofloxacin 500 mg once daily + PPI + Amoxicillin) when
standard first-line options fail. Avoid reusing antibiotics previously taken by the patient.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
41
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p45 | printed 42 | images 0 ===
SUBTYPES OF CHRONIC GASTRITIS
Parameter
Chronic Autoimmune Gastritis
Helicobacter pylori Gastritis)
Anatomical Site
Fundus and Body (spares the gastric antrum).
Antrum initially; can progress to the body over
time(pangastritis).
Mechanism
Type IV Hypersensitivity ; autoantibodies target
H⁺/K⁺ ATPase on parietal cells and Intrinsic
Factor(IF).
Chronic active inflammation induced by
bacterial virulence factors ( CagA, VacA ).
Serum Gastrin
Markedly elevated (Severe hypergastrinemia
due to lack of acid negative feedback on G cells).
Variable; can cause hypergastrinemia locally if
limited to the antrum.
Gastric pH
Elevated ( Achlorhydria / Hypochlorhydria )
due to parietal cell loss.
Normal to low (antral disease); elevated if it
progresses to pangastritis.
Hematologic Signs
Pernicious Anemia (macrocytic anemia due to
Vit B₁₂ malabsorption) and impaired iron
absorption.
Iron Deficiency Anemia (secondary to occult
bleeding from associated peptic ulcers).
Neoplastic Risk
Trophic effect of gastrin causes ECL cell
hyperplasia → Neuroendocrine (Carcinoid)
Tumors ;Adenocarcinoma.
Distal Gastric Adenocarcinoma and MALT
Lymphoma (B-cell lymphoma).
Diagnosis
Serology (anti-parietal/anti-IF antibodies), low
serum pepsinogen, elevated gastrin, fundic
biopsy.
Non-invasive testing (Stool Antigen, Breath
Test) or endoscopic biopsy.
ACUTE AND CHRONIC GASTRITIS
Diagnostic Feature
Acute Gastritis
Chronic Gastritis
Onset & Duration
Sudden onset; typically self- limiting within
days to weeks.
Insidious onset; long- standing, persistent
mucosal inflammation over years.
Primary Cell Type
Neutrophils (Polymorphonuclear leukocytes).
Lymphocytes and Plasma cells .
Dominant Etiology
NSAIDs/Aspirin, alcohol, critical illness
(ischemic stress), or early acute H.pylori phase.
2 Types : Autoimmune and . : Chronic active H.
pylori colonization.
Pathophysiology
Direct mucosal irritation, toxic injury, or acute
ischemia disrupting the surface barrier.
Progressive immune-mediated destruction or
persistent bacterial-induced cytokine
inflammation.
Endoscopic Findings
Hyperemic mucosa, punctate petechiae,
mucosal erosions, and shallow lesions.
Atrophic, thinned mucosa with visible
submucosal vessels, or nodular architecture.
Malignancy Risk
No increased risk of malignancy.
Increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma and
MALT lymphoma.
There are two types of chronic gastritis: chronic autoimmune gastritis and
Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis.
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
A peptic ulcer consists of a break in the superficial epithelial cells penetrating
down to the muscularis mucosa of either the stomach or the duodenum; there is
a fibrous base and an increase in inflammatory cells.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
42
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p46 | printed 43 | images 0 ===
■ Patients under 55 years of age with typical symptoms of peptic ulcer disease
who test positive for H. pylori can start eradication therapy without further
investigation.
■ Endoscopic diagnosis and exclusion of cancer is required in older patients .All
gastric ulcers must be biopsied to exclude an underlying malignancy and should
be followed up endoscopically until healing has taken place.
■ Endoscopy is required in all patients with alarm symptoms’ .
Erosions, by contrast, are superficial breaks in the mucosa alone. Most DUs are
found in the duodenal cap; the surrounding mucosa appears inflamed,
hemorrhagic or friable (duodenitis). GUs are most commonly seen on the lesser
curve near the incisura, but can be found in any part of the stomach.
Epidemiology of peptic ulcer disease :
Duodenal ulcers affect approximately 10% of the adult population and are two to
three times more common than gastric ulcers.
Ulcer rates are declining rapidly for younger men and increasing for older
individuals, particularly women.
Both DUs and GUs are common in the elderly.
There is considerable geographical variation, with peptic ulcer disease being
more prevalent in developing countries related to the high H. pylori infection.
In the developed world the percentage of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers is
increasing, as the prevalence of H. pylori declines.
Clinical features of peptic ulcer disease
The characteristic feature of peptic ulcer is recurrent, burning epigastric pain. It
has been shown that if a patient points with a single finger to the epigastriurn as
the site of the pain this is strongly suggestive of peptic ulcer disease.
The relation-ship of the pain to food is variable and on the whole not helpful in
diagnosis. The pain of a DU classically occurs at night (as well as during the day)
and is worse when the patient is hungry, but this is not reliable. The pain of both
gastric and duodenal ulcers may be relieved by antacids. Nausea may
accompany the pain; vomiting is infrequent but can relieve the pain. Anorexia
and weight loss may occur, particularly with GUs. Persistent and severe pain
suggests complications such as penetration into other organs.
Back pain suggests a penetrating posterior ulcer. Severe ulceration can
occasionally be symptomless, as many who present with acute ulcer bleeding or
perforation have no preceding ulcer symptoms. -Untreated, the symptoms of a
DU relapse and remit spontaneously. The natural history is for the disease to
remit over many years due to the onset of atrophic gastritis and a decrease in
acid secretion.
Examination is usually unhelpful ; epigastric tenderness is common in non-ulcer
dyspepsia.
Investigation of suspected peptic ulcer disease
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
43
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p47 | printed 44 | images 1 ===
■ Patients with a risk of bleeding or those with complications, i.e. haemorrhage
or perforation, should always have a stool test for H. pylori or a 13 C urea breath
test 6 weeks after the end of treatment to be sure eradication is successful.
Figure 3.5 — Endoscopic view of a duodenal ulcer
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome (ZES)
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a rare, severe cause of aggressive peptic ulcer
disease driven by a gastrinoma. A gastrinoma is a neuroendocrine tumor
typically located within the duodenal wall or the pancreas that autonomously
secretes abnormal, excessive amounts of gastrin.
Pharmacology of treatment of Gastritis and Peptic ulcer
A- ANTI - SECRETORY DRUGS
1. Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs)
Rabeprazole (oral – IV - 20-40 mg/d)
Pathophysiology: Unregulated gastrin hypersecretion continuously over-
stimulates parietal cells, causing massive parietal cell hyperplasia and extreme
hydrochloric acid output. This overwhelming acid load completely destroys the
native mucosal defense mechanisms.
Clinical Presentation: Multiple, recurrent ulcers extending into atypical
structural locations (such as the distal duodenum or proximal jejunum) that
remain completely refractory to standard medical management. This is
frequently accompanied by chronic watery diarrhea due to structural mucosal
injury and acid- induced inactivation of pancreatic digestive enzymes.
Diagnosis: Confirmed by documenting markedly elevated fasting serum gastrin
levels paired with gastric fluid pH verification (≤ 2).
Genetic Profile: May occur sporadically or as an autosomal dominant
manifestation of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1 (MEN1).
Omeprazole - Esomeprazole – Lansoprazole - Dexalansoprazole - Pantoprazole -
Mechanism of Action
Act on the final step of HCI secretion → Most effective acid suppressants.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
44
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p48 | printed 45 | images 1 ===
Figure 3.6 — Sites of drug action in gastric acid secretion
1. Weak bases → destroyed by gastric acidity & ionized in acid stomach (not
readily absorbed) → given in enteric-coated form
2. Should be taken 30 – 60 minutes before meals (on empty stomach): only inhibit
active pumps - Food →↓ bioavailability by 50%
3. Repeated administration →↓ gastric acidity →↑bioavailability.
4. Long duration (onset 1 hour & duration 24 hours (t1/2 = 1 h but PPIs covalently
bind to PP and synthesis of new pump requires 24 hours).
5. Metabolized in the liver.
1. GIT: abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation.
2. CNS: headache, dizziness, somnolence.
3. Hypochlorhydria → ↑ Risk of infection (e.g. hospital acquired pneumonia & H.
pylori) and Gastric tumor (in animals): bacterial colonization → ↑carcinogenic
nitroso compounds.
4. Vitamin B12 deficiency (on long term use)
5. Enzyme inhibition (clinically insignificant but inhibit activation of
clopidogrel).
They are prodrugs → after absorption → parietal cells → secretory canaliculi →
converted by acid into active form → inhibits H+/K+ ATPase (proton pump) →
Inhibit basal & meal stimulated acid secretion (98%, 1-2 h after 1st dose).
They have anti- H. pylori effect (lansoprazole most potent)
Pharmacokinetics
Adverse effects
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
45
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p49 | printed 46 | images 0 ===
1. Potassium Competitive Acid Blockers (P-CAB)
Omeprazole
Vonoprazan
Irreversible PP inhibition (↓ active pumps)
Competitive reversible PP inhibition (↓ both active and
inactive PP)
Takes 3-5 days for maximal acid suppression
Take 1 day for maximal acid suppression
T1/2 = 1-2 hrs (but longer duration of action being irreversible)
T1/2 = 6-9 hrs
Prodrug
Not prodrug
Not acid stable (Taken 30-60 minutes before meals + need acid
for activation)
Acid stable (Taken before or after meals + Not need acid for
activation)
2. H2-Receptor Antagonists
1. Cimetidine: limited use due to its enzyme inhibiting, antiandrogenic & CNS
side effects. 2. Ranitidine, Faamotidine, Nizatidine developed to minimize
adverse effects of cimetidine (More potent than cimetidine):
Ranitidine (discontinued)
Nizatidine 150 mg
Famotidine 20 mg
Less enzyme inhibiting &
antiandrogenic effects.
No enzyme-inhibiting or antiandrogenic
effects.
No enzyme-inhibiting or antiandrogenic
effects.
Anti H. pylori effect (most efficient).
The most potent.
Cytoprotective effect.
50% bioavailability (↑hepatic first pass
effect)
100% bioavailability (no 1st pass effect)
50% bioavailability.
50% decomposed by gastric acidity.
Eliminated by hepatic metabolism → renal excretion of the drugs or their metabolites → dose reduction if ↓ Creatinine clearance or severe
liver disease
1. Headache, diarrhea or constipation.
2. Tolerance, rebound hyperacidity & recurrence (upregulation of H2 receptors).
3. CNS: sedation, confusion, hallucination (mostly with cimetidine especially in
elderly, renal or hepatic dysfunction).
Vonoprazan, revaprazan, tegoprazan (newer version of PPIs): differs from PPIs
in:
Cimetidine (prototype) – ranitidine (discontinued due to risk of cancer) -
famotidine – nizatidine (oral – IV)
Mechanism & Pharmacological Actions
Reversible competitive antagonists of H2 receptors on parietal cells → Complete
inhibition of histamine mediated but partial inhibition of ACh or gastrin
mediated HCI secretion.
Potent inhibition of nocturnal or fasting but less inhibition of daytime (meal-
stimulated) acid secretion.
Individual H2 Antagonists
Adverse Effects of H2 Blockers (Mostly with cimetidine)
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
46
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p50 | printed 47 | images 0 ===
4. Antiandrogenic, ↑ prolactin, gynecomastia, galactorrhea, impotence (mostly
with cimetidine).
5. Enzyme inhibition → drug interactions (mostly with cimetidine).
6. Hypotension & bradycardia if given rapidly IV in intensive care (Block cardiac
H2 receptors)
Advantages of PPIs and P-CABs over H2 antagonists:
1. Higher efficacy → better symptomatic relief & higher response rates.
2. More prolonged effect (= 24hs → given in single daily dose; versus twice daily
dosing with H2 antagonists).
3. More effective in anti H. pylori regimen.
1- Peptic ulcer: PPIs preferred especially in severe cases. H2 antagonists in mild
or moderate cases (healing is delayed for 8 weeks & recurrence is common).
2- Anti- H. Pylori regimens: PPIs preferred.
3- GERD: PPIs preferred. H2 antagonists are used to cover the nocturnal HCI
secretion. 4- Zollinger Ellison syndrome: PPI are preferred. High dose of
parenteral preparations are given early to cover vomiting period.
5- Stress ulcer: to ↓ risk of bleeding.
6- Acute gastritis in children & gastric erosions (Parenteral)
7- Bleeding oesophageal varices: to prevent recurrence (Parenteral)
8- To avoid aspiration pneumonia during surgery e.g. obstetric anesthesia before
caesarian section (Parenteral)
Indications of Antisecretory Drugs
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
47
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p51 | printed 48 | images 0 ===
MUCOSAL PROTECTIVES (CYTOPROTECTIVES)
1. Sucralfate
2. Misoprostol
3. Colloidal Bismuth
Mech.
It is an aluminium salt of sulfated
sucrose.
In acid medium → -ve sulfate groups
bind +ve proteins in the ulcer base
→protective barrier (also inactivates
bile and pepsin
↑ secretion of bicarbonate, mucus &
PGs.
Synthetic PGE1 analog
cytoprotective through:
↓HCI secretion by ↓ histamine-
stimulated c- AMP production).
↑ mucosal blood flow
↑ secretion of mucus & bicarbonate.
Anti- H pylori activity (main effect).
Mucosal protective:
Chelates proteins in ulcer base →
protective coat against acid & pepsin
(inactivates pepsin)
↑ secretion of bicarbonate , mucus &
PGs.
Uses:
Not used - Stress ulcer prophylaxis
(mainly).
Antacids or H2 blockers and some
drugs e.g. tetracycline are given 1-2
hour apart.
Selective for NSAID-induced gastric
ulcer if PPIs fail.
Prophylactically with NSAIDs or
corticosteroids.
Anti- H. pylori therapy
ADRs
Nausea, vomiting, dry mouth.
Flatulence, constipation.
Al+3 toxicity: chelates phosphates →
osteomalacia & encephalopathy in
renal diseases
Diarrhea & colic (most common).
Vaginal bleeding & uterine
contractions (CI in pregnancy →
abortion).
Teeth & tongue discoloration - black
stools (confused with bleeding).
Encephalopathy and neurotoxicity
especially in renal disease → not give
>2 months & not restarted within 1
year.
ANTI H PYLORI THERAPY
N.B.: PPIs may be substituted by P-CABs in Peptic acid diseases and eradication of H. Pylori
ANTACIDS
Eradication of H pylori infection results in rapid healing & ↓ recurrence.
It is achieved by combination therapy with High efficacy anti- H. pylori Triple therapy.
Triple therapy: 10-14 days: Lansoprazole + Clarithromycin + Amoxicillin (or
metronidazole in patients allergic to amoxicillin).
Quadruple therapy: 10–14 days: PPI + metronidazole 250 mg + bismuth subsalicylate 300
mg + tetracycline 500 mg four times daily
Sequential therapy: PPI + amoxicillin 1 g twice a day for 5 days followed by PPI +
clarithromycin 500 mg and tinidazole/ metronidazole 500 mg twice a day for 5 days
Or: PPI + amoxicillin 1 g twice a day + levofloxacin 250 or 500 mg twice a day for 10 days
Followed by 4-6 weeks: PPI therapy to allow ulcer heal.
Antacids are weak bases that reduce gastric acidity by neutralizing HCL
Pharmacological Actions
1. Neutralize gastric acid (duration 1-2 hrs).
2. Decrease peptic activity (pepsin is inactive at pH > 4.5).
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
48
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p52 | printed 49 | images 0 ===
Antacids can affect rates of dissolution, absorption, bioavailability and renal
elimination of many drugs through:
1. Changing gastric or urinary pH.
2. Delaying gastric emptying.
3. Chelation: Al+3 salts can form insoluble complexes with fluoroquinolones,
tetracyclines, digoxin and iron salts →↓ absorption (do not give antacids within 2
hrs from administration of these drugs).
Local Antacids
Systemic Antacids
AI+3 Hydroxide
Disadvantage: constipation.
Mg+2 Salts
Disadvantage: diarrhea.
Ca+2 carbonate
Disadvantages
Constipation.
Rebound hyperacidity (Ca+2 →↑ acid secretion) →↓pain relief
& healing.
Milk-alkali syndrome (systemic alkalosis - hypercalcemia).
↑ CO2 → flatulence & eructation.
Na HCO3
Advantages
Rapid onset.
Potent (↑ pH > 7).
Disadvantages
Systemic alkalosis on long term use.
Rebound hyperacidity.
Na+ content is dangerous in HF, hypertension or renal
disease.
↑ CO2 → flatulence, eructation.
Alkaline urine → renal stones.
N.B.: Sodium bicarbonate is added for effervescent
formulations or in immediate release PPIs preparations (e.g.
omeprazole).
3. Reduce H. pylori colonization.
4. ↑ mucosal PGs production (promote defense mechanism).
5. Adsorbent (to pepsin, bile &toxins), astringent (Precipitate surface proteins)
and demulcent (soothing) effects (with Al+3 & Mg+2 salts only).
1. Rapidly relieve pain & help healing of peptic ulcer.
2. Relieve dyspeptic symptoms.
3. GERD (rapid pain relief).
Therapeutic Uses (taken 1 and 3 hours after meals & at bedtime)
Drug Interactions:
Types of Antacids
Choice of antacids
Al+3 hydroxide & Mg+2 salts do not result in CO2 release or systemic alkalosis
thus they are the most commonly used antacids, alone or combined
(e.g. Magaldarate - to neutralize the effects of each other on bowel habit).
Antacids should be cautiously used in elderly & renal impairment since:
Al+3 antacids → chelate phosphates → osteomalacia, hypophosphatemia,
encephalopathy & ↑ risk of Alzheimer dementia.
Mg+2 antacids → CNS depression.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
49
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p53 | printed 50 | images 0 ===
Precautions to Avoid NSAIDs-induced Ulcer
1. Use low doses and avoid combinations of NSAIDs (↑ toxicity without added
benefit).
2. Use topical preparations whenever possible.
3. Co-administer PPIs or misoprostol.
4. Avoid combination with corticosteroids except in selected cases.
5. Use cautiously in the elderly.
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Acute Upper GI Bleeding
Etiology:
Clinical approach
a) Initial Management: ABCDE
A – Airway: ensure airway patency. B – Breathing: assess and treat life-
threatening respiratory problems. C – Circulation: assume hypovolaemia until
proven otherwise; 2 large- bore IV lines and restore circulating volume. D –
Disability: assess consciousness and neurological status. E – Exposure: complete
examination while maintaining patient dignity and preventing heat loss.
b) Unstable Patient
Hematemesis: vomiting blood.
Melena: black, tarry stool due to altered blood.
Fresh blood per rectum may occur with massive upper GI bleeding, usually with
shock.
Peptic ulcer disease : one of the commonest causes.
NSAIDs/aspirin → gastric and duodenal ulcers/erosions and bleeding.
Anticoagulants increase bleeding severity rather than directly causing bleeding.
Other important causes: oesophageal varices, Mallory–Weiss tear, gastric cancer
and Dieulafoy lesion.
Monitor pulse and BP frequently.
Blood tests: Hemoglobin , urea/electrolytes, liver function, coagulation profile,
group & cross-match.
IV fluids and blood transfusion when indicated.
Oxygen therapy and keep NPO until endoscopy.
Stop NSAIDs/aspirin where appropriate; interruption of antiplatelet therapy
requires specialist assessment because of thrombosis risk.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
50
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p54 | printed 51 | images 0 ===
NB : Hemoglobin levels are generally a poor indicator of the need to transfuse
because anemia does not develop immediately .
Endoscopic Treatment
Endoscopy provides diagnosis and hemostasis.
High-risk bleeding ulcers may require combination therapy, such as:
Variceal bleeding → endoscopic band ligation.
For actively bleeding ulcers or a visible vessel, IV PPI therapy reduces
rebleeding.
Initial Endoscopy
Drug Therapy
Persistent / Recurrent Bleeding
Causes of Upper GI Bleeding:
Urgent endoscopy after resuscitation.
Persistent bleeding → repeat endoscopy → angiographic embolization → surgery if
uncontrolled.
Management is ideally multidisciplinary.
Adrenaline injection + thermal therapy
Endoscopic clipping
Bleeding ulcer / recent bleeding stigmata: Endoscopic hemostasis with ≥2
methods:
Diluted epinephrine injection + thermal therapy or clips.
H. pylori: Take antral biopsies.
Positive urease test → reliable.
Negative urease test → confirm with gastric histology.
IV Omeprazole 80 mg bolus → 8 mg/h infusion for 72 h
Indicated for active bleeding or visible vessel.
Reduces rebleeding and need for surgery.
Repeat endoscopy to identify and treat bleeding source.
If unsuccessful → angiography + embolization by interventional radiology.
Surgery if bleeding remains persistent/uncontrolled → primarily to control
hemorrhage.
oesophageal varices.
Mallory–Weiss Tea.
Mucosal tear at the gastro-oesophageal junction.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
51
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p55 | printed 52 | images 1 ===
Acute Lower GI Bleeding
Assessment
Figure 3.7 — Painless and painful hematochezia
Diagnostic Modalities:
Usually follows retching or coughing.
Most bleeding stops spontaneously.
Early endoscopy confirms the diagnosis and allows treatment.
Dieulafoy Lesion
Large submucosal vessel that bleeds without an associated ulcer or erosion.
May cause intermittent or massive haemorrhage.
Requires prompt endoscopic diagnosis and haemostasis.
Peptic Ulcer Bleeding
Treat bleeding endoscopically.
Eradicate H. pylori when present.
Continue PPI therapy to promote ulcer healing.
Persistent/recurrent bleeding → angiographic embolization or surgery.
Major bleeding: diverticular disease, ischemic colitis.
Small-volume bleeding: hemorrhoids, anal fissures.
Start with ABCDE.
Unstable patients require resuscitation as for upper GI bleeding.
Focused history and examination, including digital rectal examination.
Investigations include CBC, coagulation profile, blood grouping/cross- match
and appropriate imaging/endoscopy.
Proctoscopy: anorectal causes.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy: IBD, cancer, diverticular disease, ischemic
colitis and angiodysplasia.
Angiography: selected cases of ongoing bleeding, particularly vascular lesions.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
52
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p56 | printed 53 | images 0 ===
NB: Most acute lower GI bleeding stops spontaneously; surgery is rarely
required.
Isolated episodes of rectal bleeding in the young (<45years) usually only require
rectal examination and flexible sigmoidoscopy because the probability of a
significant proximal lesion is very low unless there is a strong family history of
colorectal cancer at a young age, Individual lesions are treated as appropriate.
Chronic GI Bleeding
Usually presents as iron-deficiency anaemia.
Investigation
1. Upper GI endoscopy + duodenal biopsy → exclude coeliac disease.
2. Colonoscopy → identify and biopsy/remove lesions.
3. If negative → small-bowel evaluation, with capsule endoscopy as the preferred
diagnostic test.
4. Positive capsule findings may be treated using balloon-assisted enteroscopy.
5. CT colonography may be used when colonoscopy is unsuitable.
Treatment
Complications of peptic ulcer
A. Acute complications: (surgical emergency)
1. Bleeding peptic ulcer
2. Perforated peptic ulcer
B. Chronic complications: (surgical indications)
1- Stenosis:
In men and postmenopausal women, unexplained iron-deficiency anaemia
should prompt investigation for GI blood loss, particularly malignancy and
coeliac disease.
Common causes include lesions capable of causing acute bleeding; hookworm is
an important worldwide cause.
If the bleeding site is unclear, investigate both upper and lower GI tract.
Treat the underlying cause.
Iron replacement for iron-deficiency anemia.
IV iron or maintenance transfusion may be required in selected patients.
Pyloric stenosis
Duodenal obstruction
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
53
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p57 | printed 54 | images 0 ===
2- Malignant change:
malignant gastric ulcer
I-Perforated peptic ulcer
a.Chemical irritation:
irritation of the peritoneal membrane by the escaped acid contents first at
the upper abdomen then escape of the contents to the supra-hepatic,
hepato-renal and right para-colic gutter to the right iliac fossa
b.Stage of illusion:
in which the peritoneal membrane secretes a large amount of alkaline fluids
to neutralizes the acidic fluid → temporary relieve
c.Stage of septic peritonitis:
infection occurs by the gut bacteria (gram –ve bacilli) → worsen the
condition and may lead to septic shock
1. history of peptic ulcer dyspepsia
2. Chemical irritation :
3. stage of illusion:
Hour glass stomach
Pathology:
Perforation of peptic ulcer occurs due to deepening of the ulcer through the
wall
Perforation occurs due to exposure to ulcerogenic agent
Chronic DU > Chronic GU
Anterior wall ulcer > posterior wall
According to the rate of perforation and the size of perforation the degree of
peritonitis develops
Stages:
Clinical presentation:
Sudden severe pain in the epigastrium then becomes generalized
General examination: tachycardia, normal temperature, rapid respiration
Local exam: severe tender epigastrium then become generalized + rebound
tenderness and guarding rigidity extends to right iliac fossa
Partial relief of symptoms due to alkaline peritoneal effusion
Generally : Tachycardia, low grade fever and looks better but still ill.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
54
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p58 | printed 55 | images 0 ===
Local Examination :
Inspection: Abdominal distension. (ileus + effusion)
Palpation: Tenderness, rebound tenderness and guarding decreased but still
present Percussion: hyperresonance + shifting dullness
Auscultation: silent abdomen (due to ileus)
4. Stage of septic peritonitis:
1. Clinical suspicion
A. Radiological:
1. Plain x-ray abdomen in erect position (very important):
Air under diaphragm (= perforated viscus)
2. Abdominal ultra-sound or C.T. abdomen (basic investigation)
3.Gastro-graffin meal:
may be used to detect escape of the dye into the peritoneal cavity in doubtful
cases.(not commonly used )
B. Lab.:
Pain is more severe agonizing and generalized
Generally : Tachycardia, high fever, tachypnea and toxic look
Local Examination :
Inspection: Abdominal distension, Palpation: tenderness, rebound and board
like rigidity
Percussion: hyper-resonance + shifting dullness
Auscultation: silent abdomen (due to ileus)
How to diagnose perforated peptic ulcer:
2. Investigations
How to investigate?
Detect the presence of peritoneal fluid collection
Exclude other causes of acute abdominal pain as acute cholecystitis, pancreatitis
or leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm
CBC: shooting Leucocytosis.
Serum amylase and lipase to exclude pancreatitis.
Cardiac enzymes: to exclude MI (in doubtful cases)
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
55
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p59 | printed 56 | images 1 ===
Figure 3.8 — Air under diaphragm
D.D. from all causes of acute abdomen
1- Acute cholecystitis
2- Acute pancreatitis
3- Acute peptic ulceration and gastritis
4- Acute liver abcess
5- Acute pyelonephritis
6- MVO
7- Primary peritonitis
8- Strangulation
9- Others as MI
You need both clinical diagnosis + investigations to reach proper diagnosis.
General treatment (preparation for surgery):
Surgical exploration of the abdominal cavity:
Management:
Insertion of nasogastric tube
Intravenous fluids (ringer and saline)
Broad spectrum antibiotics for infection especially against gram negative bacilli
(third generation cephalosporins)
Intravenous proton pump inhibitor
Sedative for pain.
Mid line incision
Thorough examination of the abdominal cavity to detect other pathologies
Peritoneal toilet and irrigation with normal saline and remove all septic
collections in different peritoneal spaces.
Determine the site of perforation (gastric or duodenal)
Closure of the perforation with omental patch fixed with 3 or 4 overlying
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
56
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p60 | printed 57 | images 1 ===
stitches at the site of perforation
Figure 3.9 — Closure + Omental patch closure
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………
II- Surgery for bleeding peptic ulcer:
1- Failure the above measures to control bleeding with persistent shock state
2- Recurrence of bleedings with failed conservative measures.
3- Old asthero-sclerotic patient (prone for severe and recurrent bleeding).
4- Endoscopic evident of large vessel at the floor of the ulcer (prone for sudden
severe bleeding).
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………
III- Pyloric obstruction (stenosis)
Problem solving (history of ulcer dyspepsia + picture of Gastric Outlet
Obstruction)
long standing pre-pyloric or duodenal ulcer healed by excessive fibrosis leads
to narrowing, stenosis and gastric outlet obstruction.
In case gastric ulcer in suspicious case for malignancy gastrectomy can be done.
Leave drains inside the peritoneal cavity
Indications:
Type of surgery:
exploration of the bleeding duodenal ulcer and under-running of the ulcer
base with sutures + vagotomy (commonly used procedure)
In bleeding suspicious gastric ulcer, partial gastrectomy might be required.
Pathogenesis:
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
57
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p61 | printed 58 | images 0 ===
Symptoms:
General examination:
Local examination:
1. Gastric outlet obstruction due to chronic duodenal ulcer
2. Malignant tumor at the pyloric area
3. Extrinsic compression near the pylorus due to enlarged lymph node mass (due
to lymphoma for example)
4. Lymphoma of distal stomach
5. Gastric outlet obstruction due to a bezoar ingestion (foreign body).
6. Cancer head of the pancreas causing gastric outlet obstruction.
7. Adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.
Clinical presentations:
History of long duration with ulcer dyspepsia
Pain: dull aching, in the central part of the upper abdomen. Pain was more in
empty stomach and relieved with intake of food. Pain is periodic in nature.
Vomiting: is projectile in nature, contains food materials taken more than 12
hours ago, more in the evening, sour taste (acidic) and is colorless (does not
contain bile).
Abdominal distension (dilated stomach)
Patient complains of sensation of a rolling mass in the abdomen moving from
left to right more after taking meals.
In severe cases signs of dehydration (dry tongue, sunken eyes,…)
Inspection: upper abdominal distension – visible peristalsis running from
left to right • Palpation: tender epigastrium – succussion splash (retained
fluids)
Percussion: hyper-resonance
Decreased intestinal sounds
Complications:
Dehydration
Persistent and recurrent vomiting lead to hypo-natremia, hypokalemia,
hypocalcemia, hypocholeremia and metabolic alkalosis + paradoxical aciduria
Repeated aspiration with chest infection
Differential diagnosis: (clinical + investigational)
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
58
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p62 | printed 59 | images 0 ===
1) Upper endoscopy:
2)Barium meal:
3)Abdominal ultra-sound:
detect other causes of Gastric Outlet Obstruction
4) Other radiological investigation as C.T. when suspecting other causes of G.O.O.
5) Lab.:
I. General pre-operative treatment:
II. Surgical management:
1) Truncal vagotomy and gastro-jejunostomy.
2) Highly selective vagotomy with gastro-jejunostomy.
3) Post-operative proton pump inhibitors.
4) Partial gastrectomy + vagotomy + drainage in hugely dilated stomach
Investigations:
Markedly dilated stomach
Excess old food residue in the stomach
Signs of mucosal irritation, hyperemia, due to stasis
Evidence of scarring at the first part of duodenum or pyloric canal
Biopsy from suspicious lesions
Exclude other luminal causes of gastric outlet obstruction.
hugely dilated stomach (may reach up to the pelvis)
delayed passage of dye to the duodenum
Soap-dish appearance (fluid level in the stomach)
Renal functions
Blood for serum electrolyte Na, K , Cl, Ca, pH
Treatment of G.O.O. due to Chronic Peptic Ulcer:
Insert naso-gastric tube: for suction of the gastric contents and relieve
distension • Correction of dehydration and electrolytes disturbances by
intravenous fluid and crystalloids administration.
Treatment of associated chest infections.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
59
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p63 | printed 60 | images 1 ===
Figure 3.10 — Surgical management of gastric outlet obstruction
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Congenital hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (CHPS)
It is a case of congenital hypertrophy of the pyloric sphincter detected in
newborn or during infancy.
Incidence: 2 to 5 per 1,000 births /year. The male: female ratio is 4:1.
Etiology: familial inheritance plays a role a) Deficient vagal innervation of the
muscular layer leads to failure of relaxation of the pyloric muscle.
b) Increased synthesis of growth factors, and subsequent pyloric muscle
hypertrophy, hyperplasia leads to obstruction of the pylorus.
c) The hyper-gastrinemia: increases acid production and repeated pyloric
contractions leads to muscle hypertrophy and subsequent obstruction.
Patho-physiology:
Pyloric obstruction leads to increased gastric contractility to overcome the
obstruction → gastric dilatation → projectile vomiting →loss of HCL → Metabolic
alkalosis and dehydration and loss of sodium leads to hyponatremia.
A secondary hyper-aldosteronism develops due to the decreased blood volume.
The high aldosterone level causes the kidneys to retain Na+ (to correct the
intravascular volume depletion), and excrete increased amounts of K+ into the
urine resulting in a low
blood level of potassium →hypokalemia and increased H+ loss in urine →
paradoxical aciduria.
Net results are hypochloremia, hypokalemia, hyponatremia, metabolic alkalosis
and paradoxical aciduria.
Signs and symptoms
Babies with this condition usually present any time in the first weeks to months of life
with progressively vomiting.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
60
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p64 | printed 61 | images 0 ===
Abdominal examination:
1. Dehydration and shock state in severe cases.
2. Electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia, hyponatremia, hypocalcemia and
metabolic alkalosis).
3. Recurrent aspiration and chest infections (pneumonia).
1- Abdominal ultra-sound is usually diagnostic :
I. Correction of the general condition prior to surgery:
II. Surgical management: Ramstedt’s pyloro-myotomy:
The vomiting is non-bile stained and projectile.
Constant hunger, belching, colic and the baby is unable to eat properly.
Dehydration
Inspection: Epigastric fullness (stomach distension) with visible peristalsis in the upper
abdomen from the left to right.
Palpation: firm olive shaped mass is felt in the epigastrium slightly to the right of midline
(hypertrophy of the pylorus)
Complications of CHPS:
How to investigate?
Thickened pylorus (solid small mass)
Muscle wall thickness > 3 millimeters (mm)
pyloric channel length of > 15 mm
2- Plain X-ray abdomen: marked dilation of the stomach.
3- Upper endoscopy and gastro-graffin meal help in the diagnosis.
4- Lab. To detect electrolytes and acid base disturbances (Na, K, Ca, pH,..)
Treatment:
Introduction of naso-gastric tube to decompress the stomach
I.V. fluids administration to correct dehydration and electrolyte disturbances
(lactated ringer solutions and normal saline)
Administration of antibiotics to guard against infections.
Laparotomy or laparoscopy
Open the serosa at the pylorus.
Dissect the longitudinal muscles without division.
Expose the hypertrophied circular muscles.
Partial division of the hypertrophied muscles to relieve the spasm.(care to avoid
mucosal injury).
III- Endoscopic pyloro-myotomy: per-oral pyloro-myotomy:
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
61
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p65 | printed 62 | images 0 ===
Cancer stomach
Site:
worsen the prognosis
a.Direct:
longitudinal, circumferential, and vertical within the layers of stomach.
When the tumor gets out of the serosa → it infiltrates the nearby structures
as spleen, liver, colon and pancreas
b.Lymphatics:
to the peri-gastric L.N.
c. Blood spread mainly to the liver (portal circulation) d. Transcelomic spread →
peritoneal nodules – infiltration of the ovary →
Krukenberg’s tumor or DOUGLAS pouch nodules.
Age: old age
Sex: males > females
Predisposing factors:
Dietetic: spicy foods, excess salt intake, foods contain N-nitrosamine
preservatives
Smoking
Any cause of chronic gastritis: as H.Pylori
Pernicious anemia
Genetic predisposition, blood group A
Benign gastric ulcer – gastric polyp
Following partial gastrectomy (bile reflux gastritis)
Antrum, pyloric area → 60%
Body: 15 %
Fundus: 25%
Spread:
Left gastric, right gastric, gastro-epiploic, pyloric L.N.
Celiac L.N. → Thoracic duct → left supraclavicular L.N. = Wirchow’s L.N.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
62
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p66 | printed 63 | images 0 ===
Tumor (T)
N (Lymph nodes):
M (Metastasis):
A. Dyspeptic symptoms: in male above 50 y is important alarm, progressive:
B. Asthenia, Anorexia, Anemia:
What are TNM definition for carcinoma of stomach?
T0 – no evidence of primary tumor
TIS – carcinoma in situ
T1 – tumor involving mucosa and submucosa
T2 – tumor invading muscularis propria and extending up to the subserosa
T3 – tumor invading the serosa but not to adjacent organs
T4 – tumor invading the adjacent organs.
N0 – no nodes
N1 – Metastasis in 1–6 lymph nodes
N2 – Metastasis in 7–15 lymph nodes
N3 – Metastasis in >15 lymph nodes
M0 – no metastasis
M1 – Distant metastasis present.
What are the common tumor markers in gastric cancers?
CEA, CA 19-9, CA 50, CA 12-5, CA 72-4 are the important tumor markers to
evaluate recurrence and prognosis.
Most important is CA 72-4 which disappears with surgery and reappears with
regional or distant recurrence.
Clinical presentations of cancer stomach:
Anorexia: is marked and more towards meat
Nausea and vomiting
Epigastric pain
Hematemesis and melena
Unexplained weight loss in old age
Marked weight loss
Unexplained anemia in elderly
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
63
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p67 | printed 64 | images 0 ===
C.Mass group:
epigastric mass ; firm to hard fixed in late cases
D. Obstructive group:
Mass at gastric outlet:
produces G.O.O. of rapid onset and progressive course with rapid marked weight
loss .
Mass at the cardia :
produces progressive dysphagia
E. Metastatic group:
Upper endoscopy:
most valuable, visualize the pathology – take a biopsy
Endo-sonar:
determine infiltrations within the gastric wall
Barium meal:
Detect the lesion in the form of filling defect, pyloric obstruction, malignant
stricture, linnitis plastic.
Nodular hepatomegaly (secondaries), jaundice
Malignant ascites
Enlarged left supraclavicular L.N. (Troisier sign).
Investigations:
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
64
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p68 | printed 65 | images 1 ===
Figure 3.11 — Large gastric cancer
Liver and kidney functions
Tumor makers: for prognosis and follow up
I.Early cases:
curative treatment:
1. Minimal surgery in the form of endoscopic submucosal resection (EMR) is
being tried in some centers; in:
2. Tumor larger than 2 cm, submucosal invasion, and surface ulceration or with
lympho- vascular invasion should undergo gastrectomy with appropriate lymph
node dissection. • Gastric resection involving the tumor with safety margin at
least 5 cm proximal and 2 cm of the duodenum distally
Abdominal ultrasound – C.T. to assess spread outside gastric wall and distant
spread.
Lab. : CBC – anemia
Treatment:
Tumor smaller than 2 cm
Tumor confined to the mucosa.
No lympho-vascular invasion
No surface ulceration.
Removal of the omentum
Removal of the draining L.N.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
65
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p69 | printed 66 | images 2 ===
a)Lower radical gastrectomy:
for tumors of lower 1/3 of stomach + gatro- jejunostomy = Billorth II
b)Total radical gastrectomy:
for proximal gastric tumors + roux en Y esophago- jejunostomy.
Figure 3.12 — Distal (lower radical gastrerctomy)
Figure 3.13 — Roux-en-Y anastomosis of the jejunum to the esophagus
II.Late cases of cancer stomach:
with advanced local spread or distant spread: • Radiotherapy and
chemotherapy
Palliative Gastro-jejunostomy in pyloric obstruction
Feeding jejunostomy in advanced cases
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
66
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p70 | printed 67 | images 2 ===
Figure 3.14 — Operative management of gastric cancer
Figure 3.15 — Feeding jejunostomy
Acute gastric dilatation
Acute Gastric Dilatation (AGD) is a rare, life-threatening emergency
characterized by rapid, massive enlargement of the stomach due to the
accumulation of fluid, gas, or ingested material.
I- Mechanical Causes:
Prognosis:
Depends on tumor grading, stage, state of L.N. and distant spread
The tumor usually discovered late so it has low 5 years survival rates.
Definition
Causes & Risk Factors
Gastric Outlet Obstruction (GOO): Caused by severe peptic ulcer disease, pyloric
stenosis, or periampullary/gastric malignancies.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
67
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p71 | printed 68 | images 0 ===
II- Functional Causes
Complications: Gastric Perforation (Ischemic Necrosis) & Hemodynamic
Collapse
Early clinical suspicion is vital, as mortality reaches 80–100% once ischemia
or perforation occurs.
Physical Exam & History
Severe epigastric pain, marked abdominal distension,
tympanitic percussion, succussion splash, and retching.
Abdominal Plain Film
A massively dilated gas- or fluid-filled stomach occupying the
abdomen down to the pelvis, displacing bowel loops.
Abdominal CT with IV Contrast (Gold Standard)
Defines gastric dimensions, confirms NG tube position,
evaluates wall enhancement
DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE GASTRIC DILATATION
Management depends on whether gastric perfusion is intact or compromised.
Superior Mesenteric Artery (SMA) Syndrome
Gastric Volvulus
Eating Disorders: Anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa
Metabolic & electrolyte Disruption: Acut severe hyperglycemia, & Diabetic
Ketoacidosis. Electrolyte disturbances (severe hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia).
Iatrogenic & Trauma: Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, post-operative ileus,
abdominal trauma, or spinal cord injuries.
High-dose anticholinergics, opioids, and anesthetics that suppress GI motility.
Diagnosis:
Treatment Protocol
1. Immediate Resuscitation & Decompression
Nasogastric Decompression
Fluid & Electrolyte Restoration
Gastric Protection: IV proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) to reduce gastric secretion
volume and mucosal acid injury.
2. Monitoring: conservative management with serial abdominal exams and
fasting:
If the stomach successfully decompress via NG tube, pain resolves, and imaging
shows no signs of ischemia or perforation
3. Surgical Intervention:
Emergency exploratory laparotomy is indicated if:
NG tube decompression fails, CT demonstrates pneumoperitoneum
Clinical signs of peritonitis, severe septic shock
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
68
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p72 | printed 69 | images 0 ===
………………………………………………………………………………………
Surgical Procedures:
Gastrotomy & Decompression: Direct operative evacuation of unsuctionable food
material or bezoars.
Resection: Debridement of all non-viable gastric tissue. Depending on the extent
of necrosis, this ranges from partial gastrectomy to total gastrectomy
Abdominal Washout & Drainage: In cases of perforation, irrigate the peritoneal
cavity and place abdominal drains.
THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM
69
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p73 | printed 70 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 4
Pathology of GIT tumours
04
70
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p74 | printed 71 | images 0 ===
TUMORS OF ESOPHAGUS
a. Carcinoma most common
b. Lymphoma & other sarcomas rare
They present by esophageal obstruction, dysphagia, bleeding, or rarely,
paraneoplastic syndrome.
Prognosis of esophageal carcinoma is usually poor (5 year cure rate about 10%)
Carcinoma of esophagus
Risk factors: long-standing esophagitis, achalasia, smoking, alcohol, diet (low
vitamins and zinc), genetics
1. Exophytic (Polypoid or Fungating). Growth filling the lumen (Most common
type).
2. Ulcerative type, which invade deeply into the surrounding
structure. With raised reverted edge, rough necrotic floor and indurated base.
3. Infiltrating (Schirrhous) tumor encircling the tube, also called (Annular) &
cause constriction (Is the least frequent type).
1. Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Occur in >90 % of cases.
2. Adenocarcinoma (5%): Originating in the cardiac end of the esophagus from
dysplastic mucosa in the setting of Columnar Metaplasia
3. Undifferentiated Carcinoma: lacking squamous features & accompanied by
lymphocytic infiltration.
Benign tumors of the esophagus are less common than malignant tumors. The
most common are leiomyomas.
Malignant tumors may be either
Squamous cell carcinoma - More prevalent worldwide 50% in middle 1/3
Adenocarcinoma - More common in USA - More in lower 1/3., Occurs on top of
Barrett esophagus, preceded by dysplastic changes
Gross Pathology
Histopathology
PATHOLOGY OF GIT TUMOURS
71
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p75 | printed 72 | images 0 ===
Gastric tumors
Benign Neoplasms
Epithelial polyps are rare in the stomach. Three types occur:
1- Hyperplastic polyps (70%),
2- Fundic gland polyps (20%),
3- Adenomatous polyps (10%). Shows dysplasia. The risk of carcinoma is
moderate in adenomatous polyp, slight in hyperplastic polyp, and nil in fundic
gland polyps.
Gastric polyps appear as small pedunculated lesions often multiple, that can be
removed endoscopically. Large polyps are very rare
Mesenchymal Neoplasms : Benign mesenchymal neoplasms are uncommon.
Malignant Neoplasms
Sex: male > female Geography: Japan, Chile, Iceland Age > 50
Blood group A = 20% increased risk , Adenomatous polyp ,Pernicious anemia
(atrophic gastritis type A) , Chronic gastritis associated with Helicobacter
pylori infection
Grossly it may appear as: -
-Early gastric cancer. defined as gastric carcinoma restricted to the mucosa and
submucosa - Appears as a small, flat mucosal thickening that may have a
minimal polypoid and ulcerative component.
(1) Fungating mass that protrudes into the lumen.
(2) Malignant ulcer with raised, everted edges
(3) Diffusely infiltrating lesion that causes thickening and contraction of the
stomach wall with relatively little mucosal involvement (linitis plastica, or
leather bottle stomach).
It may take one of two types
1- Intestinal-type
Gastric Adenocarcinoma
Predisposing factors
Late gastric cancer… defined as a gastric carcinoma that has invaded the muscle
wall. It may present in various ways:
Risk factors: diet (nitrites, smoked food, increased salt), chronic gastritis (H.
pylori), altered anatomy after resection
On top of intestinal metaplasia
PATHOLOGY OF GIT TUMOURS
72
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p76 | printed 73 | images 0 ===
Spread of gastric carcinoma –
L.N. –
Tumors of the Colon and Rectum
Neoplastic adenomatous polyp of the colon –
Adenomas of the colon are present in 20–30% of all individuals over the age of 50
years.
1- Tubular adenomas (pedunculated)
2- Tubulo -villous adenomas
3- Villous adenomas – (sessile)
Colonic adenomas are associated with genetic mutations identical to those seen
in colon cancer. The number of mutations in adenomas is less than in carcinoma
but increases as the adenoma enlarges and becomes more dysplastic.
Histologically, a tubular adenoma is composed of benign neoplastic glands
bunched together above the muscularis. The epithelial cells are dysplastic (
hyperchromatic and stratified and show loss of normal mucin content)
Villous adenomas are uncommon, comprising less than 10% of colonic
adenomas. - They commonly occur in older individuals as a single large,
sessile lesion have a broad base of attachment to the mucosal surface without
a defined stalk.
Histopathology : Glandular morphology
Diffuse-type:
Undefined risk factors ( no known relation to H. pylori)
Signet cell morphology
Direct spread…. Pancreas, liver, esophagus. –
Lymphatic spread : Draining lymph nodes Thoracic duct left supra-clavicular
Blood spread: . Liver
Transcoelomic, ovary (Krukenberg) , peritoneal implants
Tubular adenoma
Tubular adenomas account for over 90% of colonic adenomas.
They are commonly multiple, with 10–20 lesions present in some patients,
They are pedunculated with a well-defined stalk –
Villous Adenoma
PATHOLOGY OF GIT TUMOURS
73
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p77 | printed 74 | images 0 ===
Histologically, villous adenoma is composed of neoplastic proliferation of
colonic epithelial cells organized into long finger-like papillary or villous
processes. - The covering epithelium is dysplastic.
Inherited Polyposis Syndromes
(Adenomatous Polyposis Coli APC - Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), -
Gardner Syndrome. - Turcot Syndrome. - Hereditary Non-polyposis Colorectal
Cancer Syndrome (HNPCC)
Autosomal dominant - average onset is 25 years old -Adenomatous polyps,
mostly colorectal. Patients, on average, have 1,000 polyps -Minimum of 100
polyps are necessary for diagnosis -The genetic defect is on chromosome
5q21, APC (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) tumor suppressor gene -
Precancerous: virtually 100% will develop cancer within 10 to 15 years
Malignant colonic tumors
I- Epithelial Adenocarcinoma and mucoid adenocarcinoma
II- Mesenchymal - Gastro-intestinal Stroma Tumor (GIST) - Lymphoma Colonic
Risk factors: low fiber, high fat, decreased vit A, C, E, idiopathic inflammatory
bowel disease, familial adenomatous polyposis - Several hits to different
genes: APC, k-ras, p53; or DNA mismatch repair genes
-Survival depends on stage (depth of invasion and node metastasis) -Incidence -
Primarily occurs in patients between 60 and 79 years of age - Ratio of male to
female patients 2:1 for rectal cancers, 1:1 before 50)
Gross appearance:- -
Sites:- Rectosigmoid , Coecum any other site
Shape: Fungating -Ulcerating or infiltrating (annular)
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP)
Adenocarcinoma
Histopathology
Glands have lost polarity, disorganized and adhere to each other
Epithelial cells are hyperchromatic, tightly packed, and have a higher nucleus-to
cytoplasm content (appear more malignant).
The malignant acini are separated by desmoplastic stroma.
Tumor invades deeply into colonic mucosa
Tumor cells may continue to produce mucin; in 10-15% of patients, mucin lakes
can be seen.
PATHOLOGY OF GIT TUMOURS
74
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p78 | printed 75 | images 0 ===
Course: tumor invades bowel wall and lymphatics/blood vessels with metastasis
to lymph nodes, liver, lungs, and bones.
25% of patients have metastatic disease at presentation.
Diagnosis is based on :
Intestinal carcinoid
Carcinoid tumors arise from neuroendocrine cells present in the mucosa
throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
Grossly,
Multiple lesions are present in 25% of cases.
Microscopically - Sheets of monotonous, polyhydral cells with deeply stained
nuclei. - Stained with silver or by IHC for chromogranin or neurone specific
enolase.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are the most common mesenchymal neoplasms
of the gastrointestinal tract. GISTs arise in the smooth muscle pacemaker
interstitial cell of Cajal.
1-Spindle cell GISTs: intersecting fascicles of plump spindled cells with
eosinophilic cytoplasm within variably hyalinized or edematous stroma
2- Epithelioid GISTs: rounded epithelioid cells
Endoscopy and biopsy.
Increased serum CEA which is more valuable in follow up after surgical removal
of a tumor.
Carcinoid tumors are firm and yellow. They arise in the submucosa, elevating
and ulcerating the mucosa and locally infiltrating the wall. –
Grossly: large, bulky, intramural masses with tannish brown cut section with
hemorrhage, necrosis and cystic softening.
Microscope: Mesenchymal tumor usually centered in the muscularis propria
There are two types:
PATHOLOGY OF GIT TUMOURS
75
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p79 | printed 76 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 5
DIARRHEA AND
MALABSORPTION
05
76
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p80 | printed 77 | images 0 ===
Objectives
The student will
1) Know the definition of acute and chronic diarrhea
2) Understand the basic mechanisms and causes underlying acute and chronic diarrhea 3)
Know the clinical presentation of various forms of acute and chronic diarrhea
4) Know the diagnostic studies for acute and chronic diarrhea
5) Understand the basic treatment options for acute and chronic diarrhea
6) Understand the basic concepts and mechanisms for malabsorption.
7) Know the various causes of malabsorption
8) Know the clinical features of various types of malabsorption
9) Know the diagnostic tools for malabsorption
10) Know the basic treatment options for different types of malabsorption.
Diarrhea
Basic physiology
Diarrhea is defined as an increase in the fluidity, frequency, and volume of daily
stool output.
Normal stool frequency ranges from three times a week to three times a day.
Perception as normal bowel pattern is related to consistency and frequency.
Consistency is defined as the ratio of fecal water to the water-holding capacity of
fecal insoluble solids.
Acute diarrheas are those lasting less than 2 to 3 weeks or, rarely, 6 to 8 weeks.
Approximately 80% of acute diarrheas are due to infections with viruses,
bacteria, and parasites.
Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to exclude serious underlying
pathology. • In contrast to acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea
are noninfectious.
During fasting, the intestine contains very little fluid.
On a normal diet of three meals a day, about 9 L of fluid is delivered to the small
intestine.
90% is absorbed in the small intestine.
One to two liters is presented to the colon, and approximately 90% is absorbed.
The colon has the capacity to absorb all of the fluid presented to it.
This results in 100 to 200 mL of fluid in the stool.
Feces on the average contain 100 mL of water, 40 mEq/L of sodium (Na+), 90
mEq/L of potassium (K+), 16 mEq/L of chloride (Cl-), and 30 mEq/L of bicarbonate
(HCO3-). • Water transport across the intestinal epithelium is passive.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
77
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p81 | printed 78 | images 2 ===
Figure 5.1 — Digestion and absorption
Role of bile acids
Defects Affecting Bile Acids
Figure 5.2 — Defects affecting bile acids
Na+ is the major ion actively absorbed, and Cl- is the major ion secreted.
Water is absorbed along with Na+.
Active Cl- secretion or inhibited Na+ absorption also creates an osmotic gradient
favorable for the movement of fluids from blood to lumen and is the basis of the
secretory diarrheas.
Bile acids are not present in the diet but are synthesized in the liver by a series of
enzymatic steps that also include cholesterol catabolism.
Bile acids are either primary or secondary: primary bile acids are synthesized in
the liver from cholesterol, and secondary bile acids are synthesized from
primary bile acids in the intestine by colonic bacterial enzymes.
The primary functions of bile acids are (1) to promote bile flow, (2) to solubilize
cholesterol and phospholipid in the gallbladder by mixed micelle formation, and
(3) to enhance dietary lipid digestion and absorption by forming mixed micelles
in the proximal small intestine.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
78
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p82 | printed 79 | images 0 ===
Classification of diarrhea
pathophysiologic classification
Osmotic diarrhea:
There is increased amounts of poorly absorbable, osmotically active solutes
in the gut lumen.
Secretory diarrhea:
There is, increased Cl- and water secretion with or without inhibition of
normal active Na+ and water absorption.
Exudative diarrhea:
There is mucus, blood, and protein from sites of active inflammation into
the bowel lumen
Altered motility:
There is increased or decreased contact between luminal contents and
mucosal surface.
clinical classification
Causes of osmotic diarrhea
Carbohydrate malabsorption:
1) Disaccharidase deficiency in the small-intestinal mucosa:
Primary (e.g., idiopathic lactase, sucrase-maltase deficiency)
Secondary (e.g., after infectious gastroenteritis and with mucosal inflammation)
2) Ingestion of mannitol, sorbitol
3) Lactulose therapy
General malabsorption
Sprue (idiopathic gluten enteropathy, tropical)
Ingestion of sodium sulfate (Glauber’s salt), sodium phosphate, magnesium
sulfate
Osmotic diarrhea
Secretory diarrhea
Exudative diarrhea
Altered motility
acute
chronic
refractory
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
79
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p83 | printed 80 | images 0 ===
Secretory Diarrhea
Causes of secretory diarrhea
Enterotoxins
Vibrio cholerae
Staphylococcus aureus
Hormonal secretagogues
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (pancreatic cholera syndrome)
Serotonin (carcinoid)
Gastric hypersecretion
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Laxatives
Fatty acids
Pancreatic insufficiency
Exudative Diarrhea
Causes of exudative diarrhea
Idiopathic (e.g., Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis)
Diarrhea of 1 L or more per day results from secretion of fluid across the
intestinal mucosa.
In most cases, a pathophysiologic event causes small intestinal secretion by
simultaneously stimulating active secretion and partial inhibition of intestinal
absorption.
Often, the intestinal mucosa is intact and has normal histologic findings
Clinically, there are features that characterize secretory diarrhea:
Stool volume is usually large (>1 L per day).
Stools are watery in consistency.
Stools do not contain pus or blood.
Diarrhea typically continues while the patient fasts for 24 to 48 hours.
If the intestinal mucosa is inflamed and ulcerated, mucus, blood, and pus leak
into the lumen and are discharged as stool.
This may also create an increased osmotic load.
If a large surface area of the bowel lumen is involved, absorption of ions, solutes,
and water will also be impaired, and patients may have large-volume diarrhea.
Inflammation may generate prostaglandins, which stimulate secretion and may
increase bowel motility, thus compounding the diarrhea.
The severity of the diarrhea and the systemic signs and symptoms depends on
the extent of bowel involvement.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
80
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p84 | printed 81 | images 0 ===
Infectious (e.g., from invasive organisms or cytotoxins: Shigella, Salmonella,
Campylobacter, Yersinia, tuberculosis, amebae, and Clostridium difficile)
Ischemic
Vasculitic
Due to radiation injury
Motility Disturbances
Clinical classification of diarrhea
Acute diarrhea
(fructose polymers or sorbitol.
Causes of Acute Diarrhea According to the mechanism
Both reduced and increased motility of the intestine may result in diarrhea.
Increased Motility Of The Small Intestine: Results in decreased contact time of
chyme with absorptive surfaces.
Large amounts of fluid delivered to the colon may overwhelm its absorptive
capacity and result in diarrhea.
The reduced contact time in the small intestine may interfere with absorption of
fatty acids and bile salts, allowing them to reach the colon where they induce a
secretory diarrhea.
Decreased Motility Of The Small Intestine May allow colonization of the small
intestine with colonic-type bacteria.
Approximately 80% of acute diarrheas are due to infections with viruses,
bacteria, helminthes, and protozoa.
The remainder are secondary to the ingestion of medications, poorly absorbed
sugars
Most infectious diarrheas are acquired through fecal-oral transmission from
water, food, or person-to-person contact.
Patients with infectious diarrhea often complain of nausea, vomiting, and
abdominal pain and have watery, malabsorptive, or bloody diarrhea and fever
(dysentery).
Food poisoning: is produced by a preformed bacterial toxin that contaminates
the food. • Bacterial replication in the host is not necessary for the development
of disease.
Diarrhea resulting from multiplication of organisms in the intestine may be
divided into inflammatory-invasive versus noninflammatory-noninvasive
categories.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
81
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p85 | printed 82 | images 0 ===
Causes
Mechanism
Organisms
Viral Infections Small intestine
Mucosal invasion absent.
Noninflammatory Watery
diarrhea. Fecal leukocyte
absent.
Rotavirus (children, adults)
Norwalk virus
Bacterial infections Small
intestine
Mucosal invasion absent
Noninflammatory Watery
diarrhea Fecal leukocytes
absent
Vibrio cholerae Toxigenic
Escherichia coli
Colon
Mucosal invasion present
Inflammatory Bloody diarrhea
Fecal leukocytes present
Salmonella Shigella Invasive E.
coli
Parasitic infections Small
intestine
Mucosal invasion absent
Noninflammatory Watery
diarrhea Fecal leukocyte
absent
Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium
Colon
Mucosal invasion present
Inflammatory Bloody diarrhea
Fecal leukocytes present
Entamoeba histolytica
Food poisoning Small intestine
Toxin induced Mucosal
invasion absent
Noninflammatory Watery
diarrhea Fecal leukocytes
absent
Staphylococcus aureus
Clostridium botulinum
Remarks about treatment of acute diarrhea
Acute diarrhea with fluid and electrolyte depletion is a major cause of
mortality, especially in children in developing countries of the world.
Fluid repletion by intravenous or oral routes can prevent death.
Oral rehydration therapy can be accomplished with a simply prepared oral
rehydration solution.
The use of Opiate derivatives include paregoric (tincture of opium),
diphenoxylate with atropine (Lomotil), and loperamide (Imodium) may help in
certain selected cases.
They should not be used in patients with fever, systemic toxicity, or bloody
diarrhea.
Antimicrobials should be only used when there is evidence of mucosal invasion.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
82
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p86 | printed 83 | images 0 ===
Chronic Diarrhea
Infections.
Inflammatory bowel disease:
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease may result in diarrhea of varying
severity, depending on the extent and degree of bowel involvement.
Diarrhea in Crohn’s disease of the small bowel may be compounded by
concomitant bile salt and fat malabsorption.
Malabsorption syndromes
Endocrine disorders:
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Hyperthyroidism. Carcinoid. Non-β- cell
pancreatic tumor.
Neoplasms
Drugs and laxatives
Irritable bowel syndrome
Refractory diarrhea
Refractory chronic diarrhea unresponsive to specific antimicrobial therapy or
standard unspecific medication may present a challenging and serious clinical
problem.
Causes
(enteroadherent) E. coli , Giardia , amoeba , Cryptosporidium , Aeromonas ,
Yersinia enterocolitica , Clostridium difficile infection is often difficult to clear,
and five or more relapses have been observed .
Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to exclude serious underlying
pathology. • In contrast to acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea
are noninfectious. CAUSES
Giardia lamblia.
Entamoeba histolytica.
Tubercle bacillus.
Clostridium difficile.
Protracted diarrhea in infants and children
Tropical sprue
Persistent diarrhea in travelers
Protracted infectious diarrhea in adults: Organisms that are difficult to diagnose
and are known to cause protracted or prolonged diarrheas include
enteropathogenic
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
83
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p87 | printed 84 | images 0 ===
This syndrome of infectious diarrhea–induced irritable bowel syndrome, also
called
Brainerd’s diarrhea if it is particularly prolonged and accompanied by severe
diarrhea.
MALABSORPTION
Malabsorption Syndromes
Intraluminal digestion.
Terminal digestion.
Transepithelial transport.
Overall digestive and absorptive process in small intestine
Post-infectious diarrhea induced irritable bowel syndrome: After documented
infectious diarrhea, 25% of patients experience pain, bloating, urgency, a sense
of incomplete evacuation, and loose stools for 6 months or longer.
Malabsorption is caused by many different diseases.
Dietary fat is the nutrient most difficult to absorb.
Fat is predominantly insoluble in the aqueous milieu of the intestine and
critically depends on all phases of digestion, absorption, and delivery for its
assimilation.
Steatorrhea (excess fat in the stool) is the hallmark of malabsorption.
Malabsorption is characterized by suboptimal absorption of fats, fat-soluble and
other vitamins, proteins, carbohydrates, electrolytes and minerals, and water.
At the most basic level, it is the result of disturbance of at least one of these
normal digestive functions:
Intraluminal digestion
The process begins in the mouth
with saliva, receives a major boost
from gastric peptic digestion, and
continues in the small intestine,
assisted by pancreatic enzyme
secretion and the emulsive action of
bile.
Terminal digestion
which involves the hydrolysis of
carbohydrates and peptides by
disaccharidases and peptidases,
respectively, in the brush border of
the small intestinal mucosa
Transepithelial transport
in which nutrients, fluid, and
electrolytes are transported across
the epithelium of the small intestine
for delivery to the intestinal
vasculature or to the intestinal
lymphatic system
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
84
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p88 | printed 85 | images 1 ===
Figure 5.3 — Overall digestive and absorptive process
The Major Malabsorption Syndromes
Disorders of absorption constitute a broad spectrum of conditions with multiple
etiologies and varied clinical manifestations.
Most, but not all, malabsorption syndromes are associated with steatorrhea, an
increase in stool fat excretion of >6% of dietary fat intake.
Some malabsorption disorders are not associated with steatorrhea.
Disorders of absorption (malabsorption) must be included in the differential
diagnosis of chronic diarrhea.
Most patients will indicate that they have diarrhea, not that they have fat
malabsorption.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
85
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p89 | printed 86 | images 0 ===
MECHANISM OF MALABSORPTION
CONDITIONS
Impaired mixing
Partial/total gastrectomy
Gastric bypass surgery
Impaired lipolysis
Chronic pancreatitis
Pancreatic cancer
Impaired micelle formation
Severe chronic liver disease
Cholestatic liver disease
Bacterial overgrowth
Crohn disease
Ileal resection
Impaired mucosal absorption
Giardiasis
Celiac disease
Tropical sprue
Radiation enteritis
Whipple disease
Lymphoma
Impaired nutrient delivery
Lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Constrictive pericarditis
Severe congestive heart failure
CLINICAL CONSEQUENCES OF MALABSORPTION
Nutrient Malabsorbed
Clinical Manifestation
Protein
Wasting, edema
Carbohydrate and fat
Diarrhea, abdominal cramps and bloating, weight loss/growth
retardation
Fluid and electrolytes
Diarrhea, dehydration
Iron
Anemia, cheilosis, angular stomatitis
Calcium/vitamin D
Bone pain, fractures, tetany
Magnesium
Paresthesia, tetany
Vitamin B12/folate
Anemia, glositis, cheilosis, paresthesias, ataxia (vitamin B12
only)
Vitamin A
Night blindness, xerophthalmia, hyperkeratosis, diarrhea
Vitamin K
Ecchymoses
Riboflavin
Angular stomatitis, cheilosis
Selenium
Cardiomyopathy
Essential fatty acids
Dermatitis
SPECIFIC DISEASE EXAMPLES
Lactase Deficiency ( lactose intolerance)
Acquired lactase deficiency is the most common cause of selective carbohydrate
malabsorption.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
86
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p90 | printed 87 | images 1 ===
Figure 5.4 — Lactase deficiency and lactose intolerance
The prevalence of lactase deficiency is highest (85 to 100%) in persons of Asian,
African, and Native-American descent.
Adults with lactase deficiency typically complain of gas, bloating, and diarrhea
after the ingestion of milk or dairy products but do not lose weight.
Unabsorbed lactose is osmotically active, drawing water followed by ions into
the intestinal lumen.
On reaching the colon, bacteria metabolize lactose to short-chain fatty acids,
carbon dioxide, and hydrogen gas.
Short-chain fatty acids are transported with sodium into colonic epithelial cells,
facilitating the reabsorption of fluid in the colon.
If the colonic capacity for the reabsorption of short-chain fatty acids is exceeded,
an osmotic diarrhea results.
The diagnosis of acquired lactase deficiency can be made by empirical treatment
with a lactose-free diet, which results in resolution of symptoms; by the
hydrogen breath test after oral administration of lactose.
Many intestinal diseases cause secondary reversible lactase deficiency,
including viral gastroenteritis, celiac disease, giardiasis, and bacterial
overgrowth.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
87
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p91 | printed 88 | images 0 ===
Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth
STRUCTURAL
Surgical
Ileocecal valve resection
Anatomic
Duodenal and jejunal diverticula
Gastrojejunocolic fistulas
MOTOR
Scleroderma
Diabetes mellitus
HYPOCHLORHYDRIA
Atrophic gastritis
Proton-pump inhibitors
In health, only small numbers of lactobacilli, enterococci, gram-positive
aerobes, or facultative anaerobes can be cultured from the upper small bowel
lumen.
Motility And Acid are the most important factors in keeping the number of
bacteria in the upper small bowel low.
Any condition that produces local stasis or recirculation of colonic luminal
contents allows development of a predominantly “colonic” flora (coliforms and
anaerobes, such as Bacteroides and Clostridium) in the small intestine.
This will cause impaired micelle formation by releasing cholylamidases, which
deconjugate bile salts.
As a result, the concentration of bile salts decreases in the intestinal lumen
causing malabsorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin B12 deficiency and carbohydrate malabsorption also can occur with
generalized bacterial overgrowth.
Anaerobic bacteria ingest vitamin B12 and release proteases that degrade brush-
border disaccharidases.
Individuals with bacterial overgrowth usually have low serum vitamin B12
levels but normal or high folate levels.
This helps distinguish bacterial overgrowth from tropical sprue.
Some Causes of Bacterial Overgrowth
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
88
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p92 | printed 89 | images 0 ===
MISCELLANEOUS
Cirrhosis
Chronic renal failure
Celiac Disease
Celiac disease, also called celiac sprue, nontropical sprue, and gluten-sensitive
enteropathy, is an inflammatory condition of the small intestine precipitated by
the ingestion of wheat, rye, and barley in individuals with certain genetic
predispositions. • It is the prototype of a noninfectious cause of malabsorption
resulting from a reduction in small intestinal absorptive surface area.
The basic disorder in celiac disease is sensitivity to gluten, the component of
wheat and related grains (oat, barley, and rye) that contains the water-insoluble
protein gliadin
The small intestinal mucosa, when exposed to gluten, accumulates large
numbers of B cells and plasma cells sensitized to gliadin; accumulation of
lymphocytes in gastric and colonic mucosa also may occur.
Total flattening of mucosal villi (and hence loss of surface area) is the outcome,
affecting the proximal more than the distal small intestine.
Patients with celiac disease have increased levels of serum antibodies to a
variety of antigens, including IgA antiendomysial , anti gliadin and anti tissue
transglutaminase antibodies ( TTG Ab).
The age of presentation with symptomatic diarrhea and malnutrition varies
from infancy to mid-adulthood.
About half of adults with celiac disease in the present with anemia or
osteoporosis without diarrhea or other gastrointestinal symptoms.
These individuals most likely have proximal disease that impairs iron, folate,
and calcium absorption but an adequate surface area in the remaining intestine
for absorption of other nutrients.
Other Extraintestinal Manifestations Of Celiac Disease include rash (dermatitis
herpetiformis), neurologic disorders (peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, epilepsy),
psychiatric disorders (depression, paranoia), reproductive disorders (infertility,
spontaneous abortion), short stature, dental enamel hypoplasia, chronic
hepatitis, or cardiomyopathy.
Individuals with significant mucosal involvement present with watery diarrhea,
weight loss or growth retardation, and the clinical manifestations of vitamin and
mineral deficiencies.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
89
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p93 | printed 90 | images 1 ===
Figure 5.5 — Celiac Disease vs. Wheat Allergy vs. NCWS
Diarrhea is caused by many mechanisms, including a 1) decreased surface area
for water and electrolyte absorption, 2) the osmotic effect of unabsorbed luminal
nutrients, and 3) increased surface area for chloride secretion (crypt
hyperplasia), and the stimulation of intestinal fluid secretion by 4) inflammatory
mediators and unabsorbed fatty acids.
Recently The perception that gluten causes gastrointestinal and extra
gastrointestinal symptoms in patients who do not have coeliac disease (CD), and
are not allergic to wheat, is an increasing clinical problem.
This has been called Non-coeliac Gluten Sensitivity (NCGS)
It is purely a clinical diagnosis as, in contrast to CD, it has no biomarker or
characteristic intestinal biopsy findings.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
90
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p94 | printed 91 | images 2 ===
Figure 5.6 — Celiac disease: classical, non-classical and subclinical presentations
Figure 5.7 — Manifestations across the lifespan
tTG-IgA is the single preferred test in adults, measured concurrently with
total IgA to catch IgA deficiency (then use DGP -IgG).
Classical, Non-Classical & Subclinical Disease
Manifestations Across the Lifespan
Serologic Testing
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
91
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p95 | printed 92 | images 1 ===
Figure 5.8 — Serologic testing
Tropical Sprue And Whipple Disease
Whipple disease is a rare, systemic infection that may involve any organ of the
body but principally affects the Intestine, Central Nervous System, And Joints.
Are two disorders that exemplify malabsorption syndromes arising from
intestinal infection.
Tropical sprue resembles celiac disease in symptomatology but occurs almost
exclusively in persons living in or visiting the tropics.
Small intestinal changes vary from near normal to a severe diffuse enteritis with
villus flattening.
In contrast to celiac disease, injury is seen at all levels of the small intestine.
It is caused by overgrowth of predominantly coliform bacteria.
Individuals with tropical sprue classically present with diarrhea and
megaloblastic anemia secondary to vitamin B12 and folate deficiency, but some
have anemia only.
Intestinal biopsy characteristically shows subtotal and patchy villous atrophy in
the proximal and distal small intestine.
Treatment is a prolonged course of tetracycline (250 mg PO four times daily) or
doxycycline (100 mg PO two times daily), folic acid (5 mg/day PO), and, with
coexistent deficiency, vitamin B12 injections (1000 μg weekly)
The hallmark of Whipple disease is a small intestinal mucosa laden with
distended periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive macrophages in the lamina propria.
The organism responsible for causing Whipple disease is a gram-positive
actinomycete, Tropheryma whippelii.
Approximately one third of patients have cardiac involvement, most commonly
culture- negative endocarditis.
Occasionally, individuals present with ocular or neurologic disease without
gastrointestinal symptoms.
Men are affected more commonly than women, particularly white men.
Treatment is with a prolonged course of broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g.,
ceftriaxone, 2 g/day intravenously (IV) or meropenem 1 g IV three times daily;
then trimethoprim 160 mg and sulfamethoxazole 800 mg PO two times daily for 1
year.
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
92
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p96 | printed 93 | images 0 ===
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR MALABSORPTION
Quantitative stool fat test Gold standard test of fat malabsorption. Requires
ingestion of a high-fat diet (70- 100 g) for 2 days before and during the
collection. Stool is collected for 2-3 days. Normally, <7 g/24 hr is excreted on a
high-fat diet
Qualitative stool fat test Sudan stain of a stool sample for fat.
Hydrogen breath test Most useful in the diagnosis of lactase deficiency. An oral
dose of lactose (25 g) is administered after measurement of basal breath H2
levels. The sole source of H2 in the mammal is bacterial fermentation;
unabsorbed lactose makes its way to colonic bacteria, resulting in excess breath
H2
1) Tests for Pancreatic Function
Secretin stimulation test The gold standard test of pancreatic function
Fecal elastase-1 test Stool test for pancreatic function
2) Tests for Bacterial Overgrowth
Quantitative culture of small intestinal aspirate
Hydrogen breath test The 50-g glucose breath test has a sensitivity of 90% for
growth of 105 colonic-type bacteria in the small intestine
3) Tests for Mucosal Disease
Small bowel biopsy
4) Test of Ileal Function
75SeHCAT test This is a test of bile acid absorption.
Seven days after ingestion of radiolabeled synthetic selenium–homocholic acid
conjugated with taurine (75SeHCAT), whole body retention is measured by a
gamma-counting device. The result is expressed as a fraction of baseline
ingestion
GENERAL TESTS OF ABSORPTION
SPECIFIC TESTS FOR MALABSORPTION
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
93
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p97 | printed 94 | images 1 ===
Figure 5.9 — Practical approach to malabsorption
Practical approach to malabsorption
DIARRHEA AND MALABSORPTION
94
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p98 | printed 95 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 6
Constipation
06
95
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p99 | printed 96 | images 0 ===
Primary (functional) constipation
Secondary constipation
Normal-transit constipation; Slow-transit constipation;
Defecatory disorders (pelvic floor dyssynergia)
Drugs; Endocrine and metabolic disorders; Neurological
disorders; Structural diseases
Constipation results from disturbances in colonic transit, anorectal
evacuation, or both. Lifestyle factors such as inadequate dietary fiber,
insufficient fluid intake, and physical inactivity may also contribute to the
development of constipation.
Normal colonic motility
Normal colonic transit depends on coordinated colonic contractions that
propel fecal material toward the rectum while allowing adequate
absorption of water and electrolytes. Defecation requires coordinated
relaxation of the pelvic floor muscles and anal sphincters.
Slow-transit constipation
Slow-transit constipation results from reduced colonic motility, leading to
prolonged stool transit. Excessive water absorption from the retained stool
produces hard, dry stools that are difficult to pass.
Defecatory disorders
Defecatory disorders (pelvic floor dyssynergia) occur when there is
impaired coordination between abdominal muscle contraction and
relaxation of the pelvic floor muscles and anal sphincters during defecation.
As a result, stool evacuation becomes difficult despite normal colonic
transit.
Definition
Constipation is a common gastrointestinal symptom or disorder
characterized by infrequent bowel movements, difficult stool passage,
excessive straining, hard stools, or a sensation of incomplete evacuation. It
results from impaired colonic transit, disorders of anorectal evacuation, or
both.
Prevalence and clinical importance: Constipation affects approximately 16% of
adults worldwide and is one of the most common gastrointestinal disorders
encountered in clinical practice. Although often regarded as a minor complaint,
it may significantly impair quality of life and occasionally indicates serious
underlying disease
1. Classification
3. Pathophysiology
CONSTIPATION
96
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p100 | printed 97 | images 0 ===
History
Alarm features or Red flag features
Based on these history and physical exam findings, it's important to look for
red flag features that could indicate underlying serious conditions like
malignancy.
Hematochezia
Unintentional weight loss,
Family history of colorectal cancer,
Acute onset of constipation in an older adult,
Change in stool caliber,
Anemia,
The presence of a rectal mass
If any of these red flag features are present, we should consider colorectal cancer
and proceed with an endoscopy, such as colonoscopy, with a biopsy to look for
obstructive lesions.
Physical examination
4. Clinical Assessment
Stool frequency
Stool consistency
Straining
Sense of incomplete evacuation
Manual maneuvers
Duration
Medication history
Dietary habits
Physical activity
Associated symptoms
General examination : May be completely normal or there may be alteration
of the general condition
Abdominal examination : May reveal bloating , tenderness or a mass
CONSTIPATION
97
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p101 | printed 98 | images 0 ===
General measures
For patients with no red flag features, exclusion of secondary causes of
constipation is mandatory . These include medication side effects,
commonly seen in patients taking opioid medications or iron supplements;
endocrine or metabolic disorders like hypothyroidism, hypokalemia, or
hypercalcemia; and neurogenic conditions, such as spinal cord injury or
multiple sclerosis.
In primary constipation a trial of initial conservative treatment , which includes
increasing dietary fiber or starting a fiber supplement, advising sedentary
patients to increase their physical activity, and starting an over-the-counter
laxative, such as an osmotic agent or a stimulant laxative. . If there is an
adequate response to empiric therapy no further workup is needed.
On the other hand, if they have an inadequate response to empiric therapy,
additional testing will be mandatory as anorectal manometry and a balloon
expulsion test or defecography . These tests measure pressures inside the rectum
and anus and the ability of the pelvic muscles to expel stool from the rectum.
These test are abnormal in defecatory disorder. In this condition constipation
arises from difficulty in evacuating stool from the rectum.
However, if the anorectal manometry and balloon expulsion test are normal, a
colonic transit study will be recommended. During colonic transit studies,
patients swallow radiopaque markers, which are then tracked through the
gastrointestinal tract using X-rays. If the markers are not passed within the
expected time frame, then the test is abnormal, so you can diagnose slow transit
constipation.
On other side, if the colonic transit study results are normal, diagnose normal
transit constipation, which is also referred to as a disorder of the gut-brain axis.
There are different types of normal transit constipation. One type is irritable
bowel syndrome, which might be marked by alternating episodes of diarrhea
and constipation, or dominated by either symptom.
Management should begin directly with
Digital rectal examination: Assessment of perianal sensation and sphincter tone
during digital rectal examination may help identify neurological or defecatory
disorders . The examination may ay reveal a rectal mass or palpable stool ball ,
some patients may have anal fissures or hemorrhoids
5. Diagnostic Evaluation
6. Management
CONSTIPATION
98
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p102 | printed 99 | images 0 ===
Life style measures:
Pharmacological treatment
Class
Examples
Main indication
Bulk-forming
Psyllium
Mild constipation
Osmotic
Polyethylene glycol, lactulose
First-line
Stimulant
Bisacodyl, senna
Rescue therapy
Stool softener
Docusate
Selected patients
Secretagogues
Lubiprostone, linaclotide
Refractory cases
5-HT4 agonist
Prucalopride
Chronic refractory constipation
Biofeedback
Biofeedback is the treatment of choice for pelvic floor dyssynergia.
Education
Dietary fiber
Adequate hydration
Physical activity
Scheduled toileting
CONSTIPATION
99
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p103 | printed 100 | images 1 ===
Figure 6.1 — Evaluation of constipation
CONSTIPATION
100
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p104 | printed 101 | images 0 ===
Disorders of Gut–Brain Interaction (DGBI)
Definition : Disorders of Gut–Brain Interaction (DGBI) are a group of chronic
gastrointestinal disorders characterized by persistent or recurrent
gastrointestinal symptoms resulting from abnormal interactions between the
gut and the brain in the absence of structural or biochemical abnormalities that
fully explain the symptoms. They are common, frequently overlap, and may
significantly impair quality of life.
Symptoms can be related to any combination of motility disturbances, visceral
hypersensitivity, altered mucosal and immune function, altered gut microbiota,
or disordered central nervous system processing ( formerly known as
"functional gastrointestinal disorders) . DGBIs are recognized through clinical
symptom rather than structural biomarkers.
There are many recognized adult and pediatric DGBIs, categorized by the
region of the gastrointestinal tract they impact:
GI Tract Region
Common DGBI Examples
Core Clinical Presentation
Esophageal
Functional Heartburn, Reflux
Hypersensitivity
Chest burning or pain despite normal
acid profiles and endoscopy.
Gastroduodenal
Functional Dyspepsia (FD)
Early satiety, postprandial fullness, or
epigastric burning.
Bowel
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)
Abdominal pain related to defecation,
accompanied by altered bowel habits
(IBS-C, IBS-D, IBS- M).
Anorectal
Functional Constipation, Fecal
Incontinence
Difficult, infrequent, or incomplete
bowel movements unrelated to
structural blockages.
Pathophysiology relies on the gut-brain axis, where psychological factors (like
stress, anxiety, or trauma) directly alter gut motility and processing, also
peripheral gut factors (such as post-infectious low-grade inflammation or
dysbiosis) alter signaling pathways back to the brain.
Diagnostic Approach: Standard medical tests—including endoscopies, blood
work, and imaging—typically yield normal results, making clinical criteria (such
as the Rome IV or Rome V guidelines) essential for diagnosis.
3. Common DGBIs
4. Clinical Importance
DGBIs represent a massive public health burden, affecting over 40% of the
population worldwide
Diminished Quality of Life: The chronic, unpredictable nature of symptoms
significantly impairs daily functioning, causing a reduction in quality of life
CONSTIPATION
101
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p105 | printed 102 | images 0 ===
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a classic example of a Disorder of Gut–Brain
Interaction (DGBI) characterized by recurrent abdominal pain associated with
altered bowel habits.
To make a clinical diagnosis of IBS, a patient must present with recurrent
abdominal pain or discomfort that satisfies the following conditions:
The abdominal pain or discomfort must be associated with two or more of the
following characteristics:
1. Relation to Defecation: The pain/discomfort is modified (either relieved or
exacerbated) by bowel movements.
2. Change in Stool Frequency: Onset of symptoms is linked to a change in how
often the patient passes stool (e.g., more or less frequent).
3. Change in Stool Form: Onset of symptoms is linked to a change in the
appearance or consistency of stool,
A clinician can apply the Rome V clinical criteria only if standard medical
history and a basic physical examination rule out these warning signs:
Psychiatric Comorbidities: There is a high overlap with anxiety, depression, and
somatization. This requires a multidisciplinary approach
Healthcare Utilization Costs: Because these disorders lack physical biomarkers,
patients frequently undergo unnecessary, invasive diagnostic testing and
surgeries (e.g., appendectomies or cholecystectomies), driving up healthcare
expenses
1. Definition (Rome V Updates)
Frequency Threshold: No continuous abdominal pain but occurring, on average,
at least 3 days per month over the last 3 months.
Duration Frame: IBS requires an overall symptom onset of at least 6 months
prior, with active symptoms over the last 3 months,
Bothersomeness: Symptoms must be sufficiently bothersome to interfere with
daily activities or prompt the individual to actively seek healthcare.
2. Required Symptom Associations
3. Mandatory Clinical Exclusions - Ruling Out "Red Flags"
Symptom onset after 50 years of age.
Unintentional weight loss or unexplained fever.
CONSTIPATION
102
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p106 | printed 103 | images 0 ===
1. Altered Gut–Brain Interaction
2. Visceral Hypersensitivity
3. Altered Gastrointestinal Motility
Disruptions in the transit time and contraction patterns of the muscular layers of
the GI
4. Altered Intestinal Microbiota (Dysbiosis)
Patients with IBS consistently exhibit a loss of microbial diversity and stability.
5.Low-Grade Immune Activation & Increased Intestinal Permeability
6. Psychosocial Factors
Psychological status acts as both an initiator and a modifier of IBS severity.
History
Rectal bleeding (hematochezia) or melena not attributed to hemorrhoids.
Nocturnal symptoms that awaken the patient from sleep.
Unexplained iron-deficiency anemia.
Family history of colorectal cancer, celiac disease, or inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD).
4. Epidemiology
Prevalence Rebound: at approximately 8.5% to 10% and higher in women
than men (approx. 2:1 ratio) and is most frequently diagnosed in individuals
under the age of 50.
5. IBS Subtypes
IBS with Predominant Constipation (IBS-C)
IBS with Predominant Diarrhea (IBS-D):
IBS with Mixed Bowel Habits (IBS-M):]
IBS Unclassified (IBS-U): Meets diagnostic criteria for IBS, but stool consistency
cannot be accurately categorized into any of the three main subtypes.
6-Pathophysiology of IBS
. 7- Clinical Assessment
Abdominal pain
Relationship to defecation
CONSTIPATION
103
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p107 | printed 104 | images 0 ===
Physical examination
IBS is a positive clinical diagnosis based on the Rome V clinical criteria rather
than a diagnosis of exclusion.
We can rely only on limited laboratory investigations
General measures
Stool frequency
Stool consistency (Bristol Stool Form Scale)
Bloating
Symptom duration
Dietary factors
Psychological factors
Previous gastrointestinal infection
Usually normal
Mild abdominal tenderness and tympanitic resonance of the abdomen
Digital rectal examination when indicated
8-Rome V Clinical Diagnostic Criteria
Fecal calprotectin ( to exclude IBD)
Celiac serology (mainly in IBS-D)
Colonoscopy only when alarm features or other indications are present
Management of IBS
Patient education
Reassurance
Regular physical activity
The patient should be advice for diet modification, which includes consuming
soluble fiber, and a trial of a diet low in a specific set of carbohydrates, and low
in high FODMAP including fructans and oligosaccharides found in onions, garlic,
wheat, rye, and legumes.
CONSTIPATION
104
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p108 | printed 105 | images 0 ===
The use of peppermint oil, has been shown to relax smooth muscle and target
spasming of the GI tract; as well as tricyclic antidepressants, like amitriptyline
or nortriptyline, which are beneficial in relieving IBS- associated abdominal
pain. Finally, gut-directed psychotherapy can be beneficial since IBS has a strong
association with mental health.
No routine recommendation of Probiotics
For patient with the diarrhea-predominant type, the goal is to increase stool
firmness or decrease bowel movement frequency. Treatment can be achieved by
the non-absorbed antibiotic rifaximin, which works by addressing bacterial
growth associated with diarrhea.
On the other hand, there’s the constipation-predominant type. Treatment for
these individuals is geared towards stool softening and increasing bowel
movement frequency. There are two options available for treatment. The first
one includes chloride channel activators, like lubiprostone; while the second as
prucalopride which is a selective, high-affinity serotonin type 4 (5-HT₄) receptor
agonist. It acts as a prokinetic agent
CONSTIPATION
105
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p109 | printed 106 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 7
Foodborn Infection
07
106
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p110 | printed 107 | images 0 ===
Learning objectives
Explain the terminology related to gastrointestinal infection.
Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis ,epidemiology and prevention of microbial infection of
gastrointestinal infections
Discuss virulence mechanisms and correlate virulence mechanisms with specific pathogens
Describe the laboratory diagnosis for bacteria and viruses
Discuss different methods for preventing foodborne illness and food poisoning
Foodborne illness: are infections caused by a variety of microorganisms mainly
Salmonella, Clostridium perfringens, Campylobacter, and Staphylococcus
aureus
Norovirus
Salmonella is a member of Enterobacteriacae family,it is the causative agent of:
Diseases caused by Salmonella:
1. Enteric fever is caused by S. typhi and the milder paratyphoid fever is caused
by
Paratyphi A, B and C. Enteric fever is defined as generalized infection of
reticuloendothelial system and lymphoid tissue accompanied by sustained fever
and bacteremia. Enteric fevers are endemic in Egypt.
Pathogenesis:.
.
After multiplication in reticuloendothelial system it is released into
bloodstream and results signs of septicemia mainly fever. The organism is
transported to the gall bladder to be excreted with bile. Salmonella multiply in
intestinal lymphoid tissue and are excreted in stools at the second week.
Enteric Fever (typhoid) or Salmonellosis ,there is bacterial invasion of
bloodstream by Salmonella .
Acute gastroenteritis, resulting from a food-borne infection mainly
contaminated eggs and intoxication.
Morphology: Gram negative bacilli, motile, non spore forming.
Culture: non-lactose fermenter on MacConkey agar .Special culture media
include SS agar , deoxycholate citrate agar (DCA) and broth selenite and
tetrathionate are used for its isolation .
Biochemical reactions: partial sugar fermentation ,urease negative ,oxidase
negative, and H2S positive
Antigenic structure: O (somatic) antigens which subdivide the Salmonellae into
groups, and H antigen (flagella) antigens which determine the type within the
groups.Virulent antigen (Vi Ag) is anti-phagocytic and is present only in S. typhi.
Pathogenesis is due to endotoxins and exotoxins .The exotoxins such as
enterotoxins is responsible for diarrhea and body fluid loss .
Resistance:Killed by heating at 60°C for 30 min, antibiotics and other
chemotherapy agents .Resist the action of bile salts.
FOODBORN INFECTION
107
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p111 | printed 108 | images 0 ===
Enteric fever is a strictly human disease, from case or carrier stool and urine.
The organisms enter the human digestive tract with contaminated food or drink
e.g raw shell fish ,milk products and raw vegetables. The organism adhere to the
mucosa of small intestine by pili then penetrate to submucosal layer causing no
lesion. In lymphoid tissue the organism invade macrophages where bacterial
multiplication occurs . They are transported to mesenteric lymph nodes and
lymphatics, released into the bloodstream and are carried to many organs such
as bone marrow, kidneys intestine, spleen and liver where replication of
salmonella inside the macrophages occurs.
Salmonella organisms survives intracellularly and replicates in macrophages
due to decrease fusion of lysosome with phagosomes as well as due to the
presence of surface proteins defensins which allow the bacteria to withstand
oxygen-dependent and independent intra-cellular killing. When released from
macrophages, the Vi capsular antigen (only in S. typhi) withstand complement -
mediating killing
After multiplication in reticuloendothelial system it is released into bloodstream
and results signs of septicemia mainly fever. The organism is transported to the
gall bladder to be excreted with bile. Salmonella multiply in intestinal lymphoid
tissue and are excreted in stools at the second week.
The incubation period of the disease is 10-14 days .The fever is gradually
elevated during the first week then become steady during the second week.
There is enlargement of spleen and liver .The white cell count is normal or low.
Salmonella excretion by patients may continue long after clinical cure.
Outcome: 5% of patients cured from typhoid remain carriers for months or even
years. Urinary carriers are common in Egypt because of bilharziasis.
FOODBORN INFECTION
108
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p112 | printed 109 | images 0 ===
Widal test has many limitations as a diagnostic serological test for enteric fever.
Several factors need to be considered for interpretation:
1- Endemicity of enteric fever in an area of investigation. Healthy persons have
antibody titer due to subclinical infection. Titers up to 1:160 are considered
normal in Egypt.
False positive results may occur in an endemic area, immunization with any
typhoid vaccine or a previous infection or infection with other related members
of Enterobacteriacae
2- False negative in case of administration of antibiotics and if widal test is done
in early stage of disease where low antibody titers are found .
Persistent immunity is acquired after enteric disease. CMI is the main
immunity. Humoral immunity destroy the organism in the blood. Antibody
titer can continue for a long time after recover.
Prevention and Control by
1- Immunization: several typhoid vaccines are available for use :
Laboratory diagnosis: Specimens are collected according to the stages of the
disease. A- Isolation of Salmonella during the first week by doing blood culture
B- Second week , Salmonella is isolated from stool and after the second week
from urine by direct culture on selective media.
C- Serological diagnosis by Widal agglutination test:This test demonstrates
agglutination of serum antibodies of the patients against O-somatic antigens of
Salmonella and H-flagellar antigens of S.typhi and Paratyphi A,B,C. Antibodies
rise sharply during the second and third weeks of enteric fevers. Demonstration
of a rising titers in antibodies in the paired samples indicates acute recent
infections. The results should include the titer of both O and H antibodies and Vi
antibodies. The presence of IgM is indicative of acute recent infections.
Interpretation of Widal test:
1- High or rising titer of antibody to O antigens (≥1:160) suggests that active
infection is present.
2- High titer of antibody to one type of H antigen (≥1:160) suggest recent infection
with this type of Salmonella.
3- High titer of antibody to the Vi antigen occur in some carriers.
4- High titer of antibodies to O antigens and more than one H antigen indicate
recent immunization. With old immunization or past infection O antibodies
disappear and only antibodies to H antigens remain.
Antibiotics may be not effective on Salmonella carriage because the site of carriage may
not allow penetration by the antibiotic e,g due to the presence of fibrous tissue
Immunity:
FOODBORN INFECTION
109
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p113 | printed 110 | images 0 ===
a. Parenteral heat-phenol-inactivated vaccine contains S.typhi and paratyphi
A,B,,C hence the name TAB vaccine . The vaccine is given as 2 subcutaneous (SC)
doses. This is the current vaccine used in Egypt.
b. Other vaccines include :acetone-inactivated parenteral vaccine,oral live-
attenuated vaccine for S. typhi. Living vaccine should not be given to children
younger than 6 years of age. Vi capsular polysaccharide (ViCPS) is a newly
licensed capsular polysaccharide vaccine for parenteral (intramuscular) use.
No typhoid vaccine is 100% effective and is not a substitute for good hygiene
2.Salmonella food poisoning:
a- Salmonella typhimurium foodborne toxic infections. Symptoms (diarrhea,
vomiting, fever) appear after 12-24 hours following ingestion of meat
contaminated with rat excreta which contain large number of organisms. It last
for 2-5 days.
b- Salmonella enteritidis infection or Egg-associated salmonellosis The egg can
be inside perfectly normal. Incubation period from 12 to 72 hours after
consuming a contaminated food. The illness usually lasts 4 to 7 days, and most
persons recover without antibiotic treatment.
Campylobacter :12-15 species are associated with human disease:
Campylobacter jejuni (poultry; humans), Campylobacter coli (porcine; humans)
and Campylobacter fetus (cattle; sheep).
Morphology: They are gram negative curved bacilli (S-shaped or “gull-winged”
appearance),non-spore forming, have a characteristic rapid darting motility by
means of long sheathed polar flagellum at one (polar) or both (bipolar) ends.
Motility slows quickly in wet mount microscopy preparation due to
aerotoxicity (oxygen sensitivity).
a- Culture: Micro-aerophilic thermophilic and capnophilic (CO2 :10%) on
Selective media with added antibiotics as Skirrows medium at 42ºC which is the
natural body temperature of avian species.
Biochemical reactions: Oxidase positive, catalase positive, do not utilize
carbohydrates. Pathogenesis: Virulence factors include:
a- Cellular components: Endotoxin(LPS), flagellum,adhesins and invasins.
b- Extracellular components: Enterotoxins (LT) and cytotoxins.
Transmission: feco-oral route.Campylobacter is usually acquired from food
(specially poultry),milk,or contact with infected animals (e.g. dogs). Children
under 5 years and young adults are the most frequently affected age groups.
Incubation period of 1-7 days with acute onset, abdominal cramps, nausea but
not vomiting. The bacteria damage the mucosal surfaces of jejunum; ileum and
colon. Stools may contain mucus or gross blood. Generally self-limiting,
symptoms may last for a week or longer. Bacteremia is common and
Campylobacter is isolated from blood.
FOODBORN INFECTION
110
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p114 | printed 111 | images 0 ===
Important late onset complications following gastroenteritis include: Guillain-
Barre
Syndrome; Reiter’s syndrome; reactive arthritis and spontaneous abortion .
Laboratory diagnosis: Specimen collection and processing stool should be
examined within few hours. Care to avoid oxygen exposure while taking sample
or better a special transport medium is used.
A- Direct examination: by Gram stain and observation of darting motility in wet
mount preparation
B-Culture: on Skirrows medium.
Antibiotic resistance: Fluoroquinolone resistance has developed rapidly related
to unrestricted use and the use of enrofloxacin in poultry. The organism is
inherently resistant to trimethoprim and most cephalosporins.
Brucella is the cause of brucellosis, a zoonotic disease.It is a virulent, highly
infectious bacteria. They are facultative intracellular pathogen surviving in
macrophages. There are different species of Brucella which include:Brucella
abortus (cattle)Brucella melintensis (goats, sheep)Brucella suis (swine,pigs)
Brucella canis (dogs).Species are differentiated by production of urease and H2S,
dye sensitivity, cell wall antigens and phage sensitivity.
Morphology: Gram-negative small bacilli, non-spore forming, non-motile and
non- capsulated. Culture: Aerobic, require enriched media containing serum
e.g. serum dextrose agar. Colonies appear after 48 to 72 hours. Biochemical
reactions: Positive for catalase, oxidase ,urease and reduce nitrates.
Brucellosis (Malta fever or undulant fever): This a true zoonotic disease as
human to- human transmission has not been identified. The disease is
characterized by acute undulating fever i.e bouts of fever 3-4 weeks then 3-4
weeks without fever.
Transmission: Direct contact through skin abrasions ,mucous membrane with
infected animals or animal products (farmers, butchers and veterinarians),
Consumption of unpasteurized milk products and meat, inhalation of aerosols
from infected animal or laboratory-associated.
Laboratory diagnosis:
Specimen: blood is taken during acute disease. Other sample according to site of
infection such as joint fluid, CSF, pus .Gram stain is of no significance.
A- Culture:Blood culture is the method of choice early in the disease .Cultures
need to be incubated for up to 4-6 weeks as they are slow -growing. It is
important to differentiate Brucella from Salmonella by urease test as brucella
produce urease (+ve) while Salmonella not (-ve).
B- Serology: Is the main method of laboratory diagnosis.Two serum samples is
collected 14-21 days apart. A wide range of serum dilutions must be done in
order to avoid false negative result due to prozone effect that is commonly
FOODBORN INFECTION
111
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p115 | printed 112 | images 0 ===
present in cases of brucellosis as large amount of antibodies are produced.
Dilutions are done from 1:20 to 1:520. ELISA is used to differentiate between
specific IgM and IgG antibodies.
D- Brucellin test: intradermal test based on delayed type hyper-sensitivity.
Interpretation of the result is difficult in persons frequently exposed to infection.
Prevention:Wearing protective impermeable clothing, rubber boots, gloves and
face masks when exposed to animals. Pasteurization of milk. Treatment of
domestic animals and Live attenuated vaccines for animals(cattle)
Treatment: using combinations of antibiotics for 4 to 6 weeks.
Food born poisoning:
Staphylococcus aureus :are catalase positive Gram-positive cocci
.Staphylococcal enterotoxins do not change the taste, color or odor of food. They
are heat stable for 30 minutes of boiling and are not inactivated by brief
cooking.The source of food contamination is a food handlers carrying the
organism in nose, hands, or having superficial lesions as boil (abscess) . The
common types of food are carbohydrate rich food e.g.cake, koshari and protein
rich food e.g milk and its product .The incubation period is short ,1-6 hours, due
consumption of preformed enterotoxins. The food poisoning is characterized by
vomiting and watery non bloody diarrhea.
Laboratory diagnosis: Specimen include food, vomitus microscopic examination
of
Direct examination: Gram positive cocci in grape like clusters.Culture is done on
blood agar to isolate beta (complete) hemolytic colonies and by using selective
mannitol-salt agar. Typing of S .aureus is done for epidemiologic purposes, in
food poisoning outbreaks by phage typing and PCR.
Salmonella food poisoning: under Salmonella
Spore forming gram positive bacilli : The gram positive spore forming bacilli
include Bacillus and Clostridium species. Bacillus species are aerobes while
clostridia are anaerobes.
1. B.cereus cause two forms of food poisoning a. The “short-incubation” or
emetic form of the disease is mediated by preformed heat stable enterotoxin
usually in improperly stored, cooked rice.It has an incubation period of 1-6
hours. It resembles S. aureus food poisoning b. The “long-incubation” or
diarrheal form: caused by heat labile enterotoxin present in meat or vegetables
with an incubation period of 8-16 hours. This type of exotoxin activate adenylate
cyclase, increase cAMP cause profuse fluid secretion. In either type, the illness
usually lasts for less than 24 hours after onset.
2. Clostridium botulinum:is tha causative agent of Botulism which is a rare but
fatal form of food poisoning, is caused by a potent botulinum toxin.
FOODBORN INFECTION
112
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p116 | printed 113 | images 0 ===
Transmission and pathogenesis : Toxin is produced within the contaminated
canned food and ingested preformed then becomes activated by proteases in the
gastric fluid and by gastric acidity then absorbed in the intestine and is
transported systemically via the blood stream. it binds to receptors on
peripheral nerves, inhibits the release of acetylcholine and lead to flaccid
paralysis. Botulinum toxin is rapidly acting and signs and symptoms appear
within 12 hours after ingestion . Antitoxin is only effective before the toxin binds
the neuromuscular junction within 12 h after ingestion. Prognosis is poor for
patients diagnosed after this time period.
Laboratory diagnosis: Diagnosis depend on clinical manifestations .The
presence of exotoxins in canned food, is detected by by ELISA .
Trivalent anti-toxin serum(types A,B and E) is given IV along with respiratory
support are used as treatment .Antibiotics are not used to treat botulism,
Prevention: Swollen cans must be discarded.
Other GIT pathogens include
Leptospira are spirochetes that live in stagnant water, lakes .
Morphology: Spiral-shaped, motile ,one or both ends are hooked. Because they
are so thin, live Leptospira are best observed by dark-field microscopy.Culture:
Aerobic, at 30 °C, need enriched media (Stuart ’s media) to enhance growth that
appear after 1-2 weeks.
Leptospirosis (Weil’s disease,7-day fever): is a bacterial zoonotic disease caused
by
Leptospira. The infection is commonly transmitted to humans by allowing fresh
water that has been contaminated by animal urine to come in contact with
breaks in the skin, eyes or with the mucous membranes. Occupational risk
factors include veterinarians, slaughter house workers, farmers, mine, and
sewer workers.The disease is not known to be spread from person to person.
Pathogenesis : Incubation period: 4-14 days.It is a biphasic disease, the patient is
asymptomatic in between phases: Variable febrile onset: last for 4-7 days .There
is hepatitis and jaundice and the second phase is manifested by meningitis ( in
40% ) with intense headache and stiff neck. Hepatitis, nephritis may recur.
Laboratory diagnosis: Specimen: Organisms are present in blood for the first 7 to
10 days. After this period the microorganism can be found in fresh urine, kidney
biopsy.Direct examination: Dark-field microscope and PCR. and Culture:
Colonies are identified by agglutination test, DNA probes.Serologic diagnosis: By
ELISA for Ig M and total antibody.There are no human vaccines. Animal vaccines
are effective for a few months.
Yellow Fever (YF): It is a haemorrhagic fever caused by yellow fever virus which
is a single-stranded enveloped RNA arboviruses (arthropod borne virus ) .The
disease is present in equatorial countries in Africa and South America (Amazon
basin). Man usually forms an accidental, non-normal host for the virus .The liver
and stomach are highly impacted
FOODBORN INFECTION
113
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p117 | printed 114 | images 0 ===
Pathogenesis and disease: Incubation period:3-5 days.
1- Jungle (sylvatic) yellow fever : Monkey is the main host and the virus is
transmitted between monkeys by Aedes Africans mosquito in Africa .Forest
worker/visitor are infected accidentally and carries infection to urban areas.
2- Urban yellow fever: The disease is introduced into towns; so the cycle is: man -
mosquito-man.The mosquito is Aedes egypti.
Laboratory diagnosis:
1- Intra-cerebral inoculation of mice with blood sample.
2- Direct detection of RNA virus by PCR.
3- Detection of rising antibody titre by neutralizing test, complement
fixation,haemagglutination test.
1- Use of insecticide to kill mosquitoes and their eggs.
2- Vaccine: “17 D strain” live attenuated virus, given as a single dose
subcutaneously. Safe long lasting protection is obtained for 10 years. Vaccination
is required for travelers to endemic equatorial zones.
Dengue, and Ebola all affect the liver and the gastrointestinal (GI) system, but
with varying severity.
Human activity can bring man into contact with mosquitos eg. clearing of
forests, agriculture. The virus multiply in the reticuloendothelial cells, then
viremia occur to be localized in liver,spleen,kidneys and bone marrow. This is a
severe systemic disease in which hemorrhages, degeneration of the liver, kidney
and heart occur.
Jaundice is a prominent feature due to liver necrosis. The case-fatality rate can
be 50%.
Life cycles:
Prevention and control:
Dengue virus : RNA enveloped viruses .The natural hosts are monkeys and man,
mosquitoes are the vector. Dengue virus has an urban and a jungle cycle. Symptoms
include fever, headache, rash, bone pain (“breakbone fever”),myalgias and arthralgia.
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever is a deadly complication of dengue.Case fatality rate is 50%.
Ebola and Marburg viruses are RNA enveloped viruses cause fatal disease in man, there is
haemorrhage, fever, diarrhea, vomiting and muscle pain. No known reservoir/ vector
hosts. They are transmitted by direct contact with infected body fluids.
FOODBORN INFECTION
114
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p118 | printed 115 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 8
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL
DISEASE (IBD)
08
115
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p119 | printed 116 | images 0 ===
Objectives
The student will
1) Understand the definition , basic concepts of inflammatory bowel disease
2) Understand the differences between types of inflammatory bowel disease
3) Know the clinical features of inflammatory bowel disease
4) Know the diagnostic tools for inflammatory bowel disease
5) Know the basic treatment options for inflammatory bowel disease
Ulcerative Colitis
Crohn’s Disease
Definition
Chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract.
They are diagnosed by a set of clinical, endoscopic, and histologic
characteristics, but no single finding is absolutely diagnostic for one disease or
the other.
Moreover, some patients have a clinical picture that falls between the two
diseases and are said to have indeterminate colitis.
Epidemiology
The highest rates occur in white populations in northern Europe and North
America, where the incidence for each disease is about 5 per 100,000 and the
prevalence is approximately 50 per 100,000.
The peak age at onset is between 15 and 25 years of age, with a second, lesser
peak between 55 and 65 years.
Clinical features
The dominant symptom in ulcerative colitis is diarrhea, which is usually
associated with blood in the stool.
Other symptoms include fever and pain, which may be in either lower quadrant
or in the rectum.
The initial attack of ulcerative colitis may be fulminant with bloody diarrhea,
but more commonly the disease begins indolently, with non-bloody diarrhea
progressing to bloody diarrhea.
Crohn’s disease is marked by one of three major patterns: (1) disease in the ileum
and cecum (40% of patients), (2) disease confined to the small intestine (30%),
and (3) disease confined to the colon (25%).
The predominant symptoms are diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss.
In patients with colonic disease, especially with rectal involvement, diarrhea is
of small volume and associated with urgency and tenesmus.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
116
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p120 | printed 117 | images 1 ===
Figure 8.1 — Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis: comparison
Prolonged inflammation and scarring in the rectum can leave it so rigid and
nondistensible that the patient is incontinent.
In disease confined to the small intestine, stools are of larger volume and not
associated with urgency or tenesmus.
Patients with severe involvement of the terminal ileum and those who have
undergone surgical resection of the terminal ileum may have bile salt diarrhea
or steatorrhea.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
117
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p121 | printed 118 | images 1 ===
Figure 8.2 — Extra-intestinal manifestations
A complete blood count (CBC), urinalysis, stool analysis and culture and serum
chemistry tests are appropriate during the initial evaluation.
Serologic examination of blood for specific antibodies , perinuclear
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA)[frequent in UC], antibodies to
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (ASCA) [frequent in CD].
A newly recognized and clinically useful inflammatory marker for UC disease
activity is fecal calprotectin, which is a protein secreted by neutrophils in the
feces and is therefore a marker of intestinal inflammation.
Extra-intestinal Manifestations
Diagnosis
Laboratory Studies
Barium enema and barium follow through
Endoscopy
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
118
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p122 | printed 119 | images 1 ===
Figure 8.3 — Differential diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease
Diet and nutrition
Corticosteroids
Differential diagnosis
Treatment
Patients with mild symptomatic IBD usually are able to take food orally.
The diet should be nutritious.
Patients with Crohn’s disease who have terminal ileal involvement and
steatorrhea may require supplemental fat-soluble vitamins, medium-chain
triglycerides, and parenteral vitamin B12.
Replacement iron may be indicated in patients who are iron-deficient.
Historically, corticosteroids have been used in patients with severe UC or
Crohn’s disease to induce a remission.
Intravenous (IV) steroids (i.e., hydrocortisone 100 mg IV q6h or
methylprednisolone 10-30 mg IV q6-8h) are usually used in such patients.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
119
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p123 | printed 120 | images 0 ===
Antibiotics
Immunomodulators and biologic therapy
Anti-Adhesion Molecules
Kinase Inhibitors
When patients can take oral medications, prednisone at doses of 40 to 60 mg per
day is usually given.
Bacteria is known to play an important role in the pathogenesis of Crohn’s
disease and it may play a role in UC.
In Crohn’s diseases, the indications for the use of antibiotics include perianal
disease, localized peritonitis due to microperforation, bacterial overgrowth
secondary to a chronic stricture, and as an adjunct to drainage therapy for
abscesses and fistulas.
Metronidazole ,Ciprofloxacin and Rifaximin can be used.
Immunomodulator drugs act by blocking lymphocyte proliferation, activation,
or effector mechanisms
Azathioprine Methotrexate Cyclosporin can be used
Anti–Tumor Necrosis Factor Antibody (biologic therapy)
TNF is a key inflammatory cytokine and mediator of intestinal inflammation.
The expression of TNF is increased in IBD.
Infliximab is a chimeric mouse-human monoclonal antibody against TNF that is
effective in CD.
Adhesion molecules are important in cellular trafficking in IBD and other
diseases, in which immune and inflammatory cells from the periphery are
recruited into sites of inflammation.
Gut-selective anti-adhesion molecule, vedolizumab shows promising results.
The Janus kinase (JAK) family of kinases, which include JAK1 and JAK3 which are
critical for lymphocyte proliferation, function, and activation.
Tofacitinib, a novel oral inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK3, was recently shown to be
safe and effective for the treatment of moderate to severe active UC.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
120
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p124 | printed 121 | images 1 ===
Figure 8.4 — Indications for surgical intervention
Toxic megacolon
Malignancy
Indications for surgical intervention
Complications
Toxic megacolon is a condition in which the colon becomes atonic and dilated
because of transmural inflammation.
It is characteristically associated with severe ulcerative colitis, but it may
complicate any severe inflammatory condition of the bowel, including Crohn’s
disease, bacterial colitis, amebiasis, pseudomembranous colitis, and ischemic
colitis
Worsening of the patient’s clinical condition and the development of fever,
tachycardia, and leukocytosis.
Medical therapy is designed to reduce the likelihood of perforation.
If the patient does not begin to show signs of clinical improvement during the
first 24 to 48 hours of medical therapy, the risk for perforation increases
markedly, and surgical intervention is indicated.
Patients with extensive ulcerative colitis have a markedly increased risk for
colon cancer in comparison to the general population beginning 8 to 10 years
after diagnosis and increasing with time.
There should be surveillance colonoscopy with random biopsies in patients with
long- standing ulcerative colitis beginning 8 to 10 years after the onset of disease
and repeated every 1 to 2 years.
If the specimens show dysplasia the patient is sent for colectomy.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
121
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p125 | printed 122 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 0 9
Parasitic GI diseases
09
122
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p126 | printed 123 | images 0 ===
BOOD FLUKES
SCHISTOSOMA
Schistosomes are the causative agents of the disease schistosomiasis. Three
species of schistosomes that parasitize humans are of major importance:
S.mansoni, S. haematobium and S.japonicum.
The morphologic characteristics of the three species are given in the following
table:
S.mansoni
S.japonicum
Disease
Intestinal bilharziasis
Intestinal bilharziasis
Distribution
Nile Delta, Africa, South
America, Middle East.
Far East.
Intermediate host
Biomphalaria alexandrina
Onchomelania species.
Reservoir host
Monkeys, rodents.
Dogs, cats, rodents, pigs and
cattle
Habitat
Inferior mesenteric plexus of
veins
perior mesenteric plexus of
veins
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
123
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p127 | printed 124 | images 1 ===
Figure 9.1 — Schistosoma life cycle
Eggs escape to the perivascular tissue due to:
i. pressure within the venule.
ii. effect of the spine.
iii. the oozing lytic secretion of the miracidium within the egg. From the
perivascular tissue eggs pass to the lumen of the intestine in case of S.mansoni
and S.japonicum and to the lumen of the urinary bladder in case of S.
haematobium.
When the embryonated eggs (diagnostic stage) discharged in faeces enter fresh
water, miracidia hatch from the eggs, rapidly swim by means of cilia (survive for
24 hours). Then they penetrate the body of snail (intermediate host).
The cercariae infect the definitive host by penetrating the skin, aided by:
i. proteolytic enzymes secreted from penetration glands.
ii. the surface tension of drying droplets of water.
iii. the strong lashing movements of the tail pressing the body of the cercaria
into the skin. Drinking water may lead to infection when cercariae penetrate the
mucosa above gastric acidity that kills them.
They lose their tails out and transform into the schistosomula.
Lifecycle:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
124
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p128 | printed 125 | images 0 ===
Schistosomula migrate to the lungs via the venous circulation. They break out
from the - lungs Through the pulmonary capillaries and are carried through the
left heart into the systemic circulation. They finally reach the intra-hepatic
branches of the portal veins in the liver where they settle down and mature.
Within several weeks, pairing of the worms takes place and they migrate to the
mesenteric - veins (S.mansoni and S. japonicum) or to the vesical plexus (S.
haematobium), where the females lay eggs.
The prepatent period between penetration by cercariae and the appearance of
eggs in the - excreta is around 35 days for S.munsoni and Sjaponicum and about
70 days for S.haematobium.
Intestinal schistosomiasis is 7-8 weeks (for S. mansoni infection) and 5-6
weeks (for S. japonicum infection).
Pathological changes are caused mainly by schistosome eggs deposited in
various tissues. The antigens excreted from embryonated eggs result in
formation of granulomas that lead eventually to fibrotic changes in the tissues
involved in chronic infections. Thus, the lesions produced by the infections are
essentially the same among the 3 major species of schistosomes. There are 4
progressive stages:
1. Stage of invasion (1 - 4 days):
2. Stage of migration (3 — 4 weeks):
Metabolic products of migrating parasites: result in toxic and allergic
manifestations de - urticarial, eosinophilia, leukocytosis, fever, and headache
and muscle pain.
3. Stage of egg deposition and extrusion (acute stage: 1-2 month):
Eggs deposited in the venous plexus escape from the veins into the perivascular
tissue and finally find their way to the outside with urine and stool (open lesion
stage). With extrusion of eggs through the wall of the intestine or bladder, there
may be again generalized malaise, fever, rigors, urticaria, abdominal pain and
liver tenderness.
Active egg deposition results in tissue damage and haemorrhage.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE:
Skin lesion due to cercarial penetration.
Local dermatitis, irritation, papular rash.
Lung: verminous pneumonitis, minute haemorrhages, cough and haemoptysis.
Liver: enlarged and tender.
In schistosomiasis mansoni and schistosomiasis japonicum (intestinal
bilharziasis):
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
125
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p129 | printed 126 | images 0 ===
dysentery with blood and mucus in stooliaca
4. Stage of tissue reaction (chronic stage):
Eggs trapped in the tissue secrete soluble egg antigen that stimulate
inflammatory reactions (cosinophilic granulomas) and fibrosis leading to
formation of bilharzial nodules, papiliomata, sandy patches and reduced egg
output (closed - lesion stage).
The intestinal wall becomes fibrosed, thickened and may be complicated with
strictures, sinuses, fistulac and prolapse.
Eggs that fail to be fixed to venules of intestinal walls fall in the lumen and are
swept by the blood to the liver. This results in periportal fibrosis, portal
hypertension, hepatosplenomegaly, followed by shrunken fibroscd liver.
This results in portal hypertension with oesophageal varices, haemorrhoids, and
asetes. This is manifested by haematemesis, melena and distended abdomen.
This stage ends in hepatocellular failure (impaired liver function) and fatal
haemorrhage The enlarged spleen and the hypersplenism lead to destruction of
the red blood cells that add i the existing anaemia. Later on it leads to
pancytopenia.
II. Intestinal schistosomiasis:
1.Clinical diagnosis:
Living in or visiting endemic areas with history of exposure to canals water
and complaining of dysentery or hepatosplenomegaly is suggestive.
2.Parasitological diagnosis:
Stool examination for recovery of the eggs (diagnostic stage) by:
a. Direct smear.
b. Concentration techniques may be required when infection is light.
3.Immunodiagnosis:
Decection of antigens and antibodies as in urinary schistosomiasis.
4. Other tests:
a) Complete blood count (CBC): Shows eosinophilia up to 40 % and anaemia.
b) Rectal swab c) colonoscopy and sigmoidoscopy for visualizing lesions
e.g. papillomata, cologic peiyrosis, and for biopsies.
symptoms:
abdominal pain.
Sjaponicum may present with Katayama fever
In schistosomiasis mansoni and schistosomiasis japonicum:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
126
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p130 | printed 127 | images 0 ===
d) Ultrasonography and other imaging techniques: show periportal fibrosis and
heptesplenomegaly.
1. Praziquante! (Biltricide), Oxmoquine (Vansil) and Metriphonate
1. Mass treatment and follow up of infected persons.
2. Health education
3- Snail control
TAENIA SAGINATA
(BEEF TAPE WORM, BALD TAPE WORM)
Cosmopolitan especially in cattle raising countries.
1. Adult lives in the small intestine of man who is the only definitive host
attaching itself to the mucosa.
2. Mode of infection: by ingestion of undercooked beef containing viable
cysticerci usually in the form of hamburgers or grilled meat (Kebab).
In the small intestine, the scolex is evaginated and gets attached to the mucosa
and matures in about 3 months.
Habitat: small intestine.
DH: man.
IH: cattle.
Infective stage: cysticercous bovis in cattle meat.
Diagnostic stage : mature egg in stool.
1. Intestinal disturbances, hunger pains and diarrhea.
2. Neurologic manifestations.
3. Intestinal obstruction.
4. Loss of weight as the parasite consumes much of the food of the patient
leading to matnutrition and avitaminosis.
5. Appendicitis or cholangitis caused by stray segments of the worm.
TREATMENT:
PREVENTION AND CONTROL:
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION:
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
127
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p131 | printed 128 | images 0 ===
6. Migrating segments creeping out of the anus cause irritation, itching and
worry of the patient
1. Clinical diagnosis: Suggestive symptoms as diarrhoea and weight loss, with
passage of gravid segments through the anus.
2. Parasitological diagnosis:
Compress the segments between two slides and count the main lateral branches.
3. Immunodiagnosis: Detection of coproantigen in patients’ stool by ELISA.
TREATMENT:
1. Praziquantel is the drug of choice for both Taenia saginata and Taenia solium;
it causes worm paralysis, in a dose of 10mg/Kg as a single oral dose.
2. Yomesan in a single oral dose of 2 gm on empty stomach.
1. Treatment of the infected persons.
2. Avoid grazing cattle on fields fertilized by human manure.
3. Proper meat inspection in slaughter houses.
4. Refrigeration of meat at -10°C for 5 days.
5. Thorough cooking of beef.
TAENIA SOLIUM
(Pork tape worm)
Cosmopolitan where pork is eaten. Thus it is rare in Islamic and Jewish
communities.
Similar to T.saginata but differs in:
1. Pig is the intermediate host.
2. Larval stage is the cysticercus cellulosae which differs from cysticercus bovis
in having invaginated scolex with four suckers and hooks (infective stage).
3. Man is infected by ingestion of undercooked pork
DIAGNOSIS:
Stool examination to find eggs and proglottids (diagnostic stagesRecovery of
eggs from perianal region using a swab.
Gravid segments in faeces, if not found give a saline purge.
CONTROL:
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
128
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p132 | printed 129 | images 0 ===
1- Intestinal disturbances, neurologic manifestations, intestinal obstruction
or loss of weight.
2- When man ingests eggs of T.solium, the larval stage (cysticercus cellulosae)
develops in the extraintestinal tissues leading to a condition known as
cysticercosis. This condition is likely to occur with T.solium not with T.saginata,
a fact which makes T.solium runs a more serious course.
1- Clinical diagnosis.
2- Laboratory diagnosis:
a) Examination of stool to detect the gravid segments .The eggs are rarely present
in stool and are similar to those of T.saginata.
1. Similar to that of T.saginata.
2. Yomesan in a single oral dose of 2gm on empty stomach. It is recommended to
give a saline purge 1-2 hours later to avoid cysticercosis from eggs of
disintigerated segments. Also Quinacrine hydrochloride (atebrine) can be added
as it leads to expulsion of the parasite in an intact form.
3. Giving antiemetic before treatment to avoid vomiting.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE:
DIAGNOSIS:
TREATMENT:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
129
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p133 | printed 130 | images 1 ===
Figure 9.2 — Taenia saginata and solium life cycle
intestinal Nematodes
Ascaris lumibricoides
(Giant intestinal round worm)
Cosmopolitan. More prevalent in warm countries with bad sanitation.
Commn in Egypt (especially children).
Host: Man.
Habitat: Small intestine (free in the lumen).
(Geohelminthic infection
Life cycle: (Taenia saginata and solium)
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION:
Life cycle:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
130
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p134 | printed 131 | images 2 ===
Figure 9.3 — Ascaris life cycle
Figure 9.4 — Ascaris: male and female worms
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
131
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p135 | printed 132 | images 1 ===
Figure 9.5 — Ascaris egg
Ascaris egg infection of man takes place by swallowing water or raw vegetables
polluted with embryonated eggs containing the infective larva or through
contaminated hands by polluted soil.
Tissue damage may be due to:
1. Large size of Ascaris (largest intestinal nematode).
2. Adults do not attach to intestinal wall, thus they may go to ectopic places.
3. Toxic products stimulate immune response.
The usual infection (10 - 20 worms) often passes unnoticed. In heavier
infection the following occurs:
1. During larval migration:
There is intense local inflammatory reaction around the larvae leading to
pneumonitis manifested by fever, cough, dyspnea and eosinophilia.
In the intestine:
Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, colic, distention or dyspepsia due to
production of - anti. enzymes that interfere with protein digestion leading to
malnutrition and underdevelopment of children.
Traumatic effects:
due to irritation of adult worms by fever, drugs or anaesthesia. -
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE:
CLINICAL PICTURE:
Changes of the bowel movements (diarrhoea or constipation).
2. Complications:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
132
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p136 | printed 133 | images 0 ===
Intestinal obstruction, volvulus and intussusception occur by a mass of worms.
Worms are not fixed to intestine so may be sloughed to:
The by-products of living and dead worms may produce toxic symptoms in
sensitized persons such as oedema of the face, urticaria, asthma, insomnia,
nervous irritability and convulsions.
1- Clinical diagnosis: non specific.
2- Parasitological diagnosis:
Detection of eggs in the stool.
Detection of larvae in the sputum and Charcot Leyden crystals early in the
disease.
3- other tests:
Mebendazole or flubendazole: 100 mg twice per day for 3 days.
1- Purification and chlorination of water.
2- Proper washing of raw vegetables and washing hands before meals.
3- Proper disposal of sewage (human faeces).
4- Mass treatment, personal hygiene and education of people.
Bile ducts causing obstructive jaundice.
Liver (carrying intestinal bacteria) resulting in liver abscesses.
Appendix leading appendicitis.
Ampulla of vater leading acute haemorrhagic pancreatitis.
Peritoneum leading to peritonitis.
Stomach leading to vomiting or escape through external nares.
Very rarely to the trachea leading to suffocation.
Toxic effects:
DIAGNOSIS:
High cosinophilia.
X-ray on abdomen after barium meal reveals worms as filling defects
TREATMENT:
PREVENTION AND CONTROL:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
133
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p137 | printed 134 | images 0 ===
Enterobius vermicularis
(Pin worm, Seat worm)
Cosmopolitan, more in temperate and cold climates.
Final host:
Man especially children.
Habitat:
Large intestine mainly caecum, colon, rectum and appendix.
1- Ingestion of infective eggs through:
2- Air-borne infection through inhalation of eggs in dust particles.
1) Irritation, itching and scratching of the peri-anal skin (pruritis ani), lead to
insomnia, nervous manifestations and secondary bacterial infection.
2) Worms in young girls may deposit eggs on vulva producing pruritis vulvae.
3) Worms may migrate to the vagina (vaginitis), uterus, urinary bladder
(urethritis) leading to irritation and inflammation.
4) Appendicitis is due to migrating adults.
5) Due to the easy spread of infection from one member of the family to another,
all the family should be examined and all infected ones should be treated at the
same time to get rid of the infection among the whole family.
6) Sometimes, the vagina and bladder are invaded in female patients causing
irritation.
7) Migration to the peritoneal cavity (through uterine tubes) will cause pelvic
peritonitis.
1- Clinically: Infection is suspected in children with Pruritus ani at night.
2-Laboratory:
Geographical distribution:
Mode of infection:
Autoinfection (contaminated hand to mouth).
Contaminated food or drinks.
Pathogenesis and symptoms:
Diagnosis:
Adult worms may be seen in stool or anal area.
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
134
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p138 | printed 135 | images 0 ===
Swabbing of anal or perianal area by:
1. Albendazle, Mebendazole
2. Local application of white oxide of mercury (white precipitate ointment)
around the anus at night (relieves itching, kills female worms coming out and
prevents dispersal of eggs).
Eggs are rarely found in stool (about 5 % only).
a) N.I.H. swab (National Institute of Health) b) Scotch adhesive tape swab:
Treatment:
Prevention and control:
Personal hygiene.
Infected persons should sleep alone, their underwear and bedding carefully handled &
washed.
Food and drink should be protected from dust & hand.
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
135
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p139 | printed 136 | images 1 ===
Life cycle:
Figure 9.6 — Enterobius vermicularis life cycle
EXTRA-INTESTINAL AMOEBIASIS
A. HEPATIC AMOEBIASIS
Hepatic amoebiasis may occur due to either:
a. Direct spread of amoebic trophozoites from a primary intestinal lesion to
surrounding tissues.
Or b y
b. Haematogenous spread through invasion of blood , Portal circulation
draining the intestine carries amoebic emboli mainly to the right lobe of the
liver.
PATHOGENESIS
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
136
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p140 | printed 137 | images 0 ===
Hepatic amoebiasis:
liver affection may be in the form of diffuse amoebic hepatitis or liver
abscess.
a.Diffuse Amoebic Hepatitis:
In considerable number of patients with amoebic colitis there is an
associated enlargement of the liver. This condition starts with constant
invasion of the liver by amoebae from an active intestinal process via the
portal circulation.
b.Amoebic liver Abscess:
In foci where amoebic colonization continues, there is lytic necrosis of
hepatic parenchyma. The lesions coalesce forming typically a solitary
lesion. It begins as a small area of necrosed hepatic tissue , which increases
in size with liquefaction in the centre and thickening of the wall. Its
contents are lysed liver cells, bile,fat,RBCs and collagen strands; all forming
a viscid chocolate red or creamy mass(anchovy-sauce pus).Amoebic
trophozoites are only found in the edge of the lesion where they multiply.
The commonest site is the posterior part of the right lobe (silent area)
causing upward bulging of the diaphragm. The hepatic abscess may become
chronic, absorbed, fibrosed, calcified or may extend to other organs.
a. Symptoms:
There is usually an acute onset of pain in the upper abdomen with high
fever. Th pain is intense and constant, radiating to the scapular region and
right shoulder; it increases with deep breathing or coughing.
Fever is varying from 380 and 400 C. There is anorexia , nausea , vomiting and
fatigue.
b. Signs:
1. Enlarged tender liver
2. Pallor
3. Earthy look
4. Fever
5. Tinge of jaundice
Other causes of hepatomegaly and cystic lesions in the liver (hydatid disease)
Clinical picture:
Differential diagnosis
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
137
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p141 | printed 138 | images 0 ===
a.Clinical diagnosis:
clinical picture
b. Laboratory diagnosis:
1. Indirect by serological tests: to detect specific antibodies. The indirect
haemagglutination test (IHAT) and ELISA technique and both sensitive and
specific but cannot be used to assess cure because antibodies persist for a
longtime.
2. Direct diagnosis by:
i. Aspiration of the abscess: specimen is taken from the border of the abscess for
detection of trophozoite.
ii. Stool examination: may be positive in only one third of cases.
iii. Detection of copro-antigen (in stool) by enzyme immunoassay.
c. Radiology:
i. X-ray shows high density in hepatic shadow and abnormal elevation of the
right dome of diaphragm
ii. Ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonancemay
visualize the amoebic liver abscess.
d. Complete blood count (CBC) shows polymorphonuclearleucocytosis in
Amoebic
Liver Abscess (differentiated from viral hepatitis).
1. personal hygiene
2. Washing of fresh-eaten vegetables and fruits.
3. Safe water supply, water from polluted source should be boiled.
4. Insect control or protection of food from insects
5. Treatment of patients and examination of contacts
Diagnosis:
Prevention and control:
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
138
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p142 | printed 139 | images 1 ===
Figure 9.7 — Entamoeba histolytica life cycle
PARASITIC GI DISEASES
139
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p143 | printed 140 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 1 0
Surgery of the Small
Intestine and Colon
10
140
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p144 | printed 141 | images 0 ===
Diverticular diseases
1- Meckel’s diverticulum
2- Diverticulosis of the colon
Meckel’s diverticulum
1- In embryonic life, the fetal mid-gut receives its nutrition from the placenta
via the vitello- intestinal duct.
2- The duct then undergoes progressive obliteration and usually disappears by 7
weeks’ gestation.
3- When the duct fails to fully obliterate, different types of vitelline duct
anomalies appear.
(a) Umbilical fistula: a patent whole vitelline duct
(b) A fibrous band that connects the ileum to the inner surface of the umbilicus.
(c) Enterocele or cyst in the middle part
(d) Umbilical polyp patent distal part.
(e) Meckel diverticulum, most common (97 %):
It is the most common congenital abnormality of the small intestine.
It is caused by an incomplete obliteration of the vitello-intestinal duct.
Patho - physiology:
Patent proximal part of the duct.
A blind-ending true diverticulum that contains all layers of the ileum.
Meckel diverticulum almost always occurs on the anti-mesenteric border of the ileum.
Rule of 2 :
It is usually 2 feet (40-60 cm) proximal to the ileocecal valve,
2 cm wide
2 inches long
found in 2 % of the population,
often presents before age 2 years
May contain 2 ectopic mucosa (gastric – pancreatic).
Symptomatic in 2 %
2 times common in males than females
SMALL INTESTINE AND COLON SURGERY
141
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p145 | printed 142 | images 1 ===
Figure 10.1 — Anomalies of vitello-intestinal duct
I- Aymptomatic in 98 %
II -
Lower GI bleeding:
Clinical presentation and complications:
25-50% (of symptomatic cases)
Due to ileal ulceration by heterotopic gastric mucosa:
presented with painless bleeding per rectum mostly in children below 5 y III -
Local inflammation = Mickel’s diverticulitis : 10 - 20%
Clinically resembling appendicitis.
Usually in adult patients
Usually due to ectopic acid producing gastric mucosa.
IV - Intestinal obstruction :
Due to internal segmental volvulus or intussusception or by congenital band.
Picture of acute intestinal obstruction (Colics – distension –vomiting – absolute
constipation)
SMALL INTESTINE AND COLON SURGERY
142
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p146 | printed 143 | images 2 ===
Figure 10.2 — Complications of Meckel’s diverticulum
1- Difficult diagnosis preoperatively
2- “Meckel’s scan” by -Tc-99:
Figure 10.3 — Meckel’s diverticulum
Investigations:
Most accurate test, especially in children.
Taken up by gastric mucosa.
( ● Accuracy 90% in pediatric patients.
3- Abdominal CT scan is often helpful in cases of obstruction
4- Barium meal and follow through.
Treatment
● If symptomatic, surgical intervention to resect the diverticulum or segment of
ileum containing the diverticulum.
● If bleeding, the source of bleed is often in the segment of ileum adjacent to the
diverticulum.
● If asymptomatic and found incidentally at surgery:
In children, resection is recommended.
In asymptomatic adults, resection is controversial since only about 2% of these
patients will become symptomatic and there is about a 2% incidence of
complications (stenosis, adhesions) after prophylactic resection.
SMALL INTESTINE AND COLON SURGERY
143
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p147 | printed 144 | images 2 ===
Figure 10.4 — Diverticulum resection
Figure 10.5 — Resection of the diverticulum
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
SMALL INTESTINE AND COLON SURGERY
144
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p148 | printed 145 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 1 1
Diverticulosis of the colon
11
145
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p149 | printed 146 | images 1 ===
Figure 11.1 — Diverticulosis of the colon
A diverticulum is a sac like protrusion in the colonic wall that develops as
Result of herniation of the mucosa and submucosa through points of
weakness in the muscular wall of the colon.
How it is formed ? Increased intra-luminal pressure as in chronic constipation →
protrusion of the mucosa through the points of entry of the arteries in the
muscle wall (weak points).
I- Aymptomatic (non-complicated)
II- Acute diverticulitis
III- Fistula (colo-vesical or colo-vaginal)
IV- Colonic bleeding
V- Obstruction
Definition:
Predisposing factors: (increased intra-luminal pressure)
Low-fiber diet and high carbohydrates
Obesity
Decreased physical activity
Cigarette smoking
Disordered motility of the colon
Chronic constipation
Increasing age
Which parts of the colon affected?
Any part could be affected except the rectum
The rectum has complete muscle coat (no taenia coli) prevent protrusion of the
mucosa
Clinical presentation and complications
DIVERTICULOSIS OF THE COLON
146
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p150 | printed 147 | images 0 ===
A- Acute diverticulitis
Stages:
1- Acute diverticulitis → just inflammation of the diverticulum
2- Perforation of the diverticulum → peri-colic collection of pus and fecal matter
3- peri-colic abcess formation
4- Generalized peritonitis
General Symptoms and signs:
Local symptoms:
1- Pain
Local signs:
1- Abdominal distension
2- Tenderness in left side of the abdomen and left iliac fossa (diverticulitis) 3-
Tenderness, rebound tenderness and guarding rigidity in case of perforation and
abcess formation
4- Picture of generalized peritonitis may occur in neglected cases.
(same as in 3 but generalized).
B- Picture of fistula
C- Bleeding per-rectum
D.D : common causes of bleeding per/rectum
1- Tumours of the colon
2- Angiodysplasia
3- Inflammatory bowel diseases
4- Fissures and piles
5- Dysentery
Fever (high with perforation and abcess)
Toxemia in case of peritonitis.
Mainly in left side of the abdomen (more in left iliac fossa).
Dull aching and fixed
2- Anorexia and vomiting
3- History of chronic constipation of long duration
Colo-vesical fistula presented with pneumaturia, and recurrent urinary infections.
Colo-vaginal fistula presented with recurrent vaginitis.
DIVERTICULOSIS OF THE COLON
147
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p151 | printed 148 | images 2 ===
Lab. 1- CBC → Leucocytosis
2- Liver, renal functions
Radiology:
1- Plain X-ray abdomen erect → air under diaphragm in perforation
2- Abdominal ultra-sound to detect fluid collections in perforation
3- C.T. Scan → detect the diverticulae, collection and peri-colic abcess 4- Barium
enema is done in non-complicated diverticulosis → Saw-tooth appearance
Figure 11.2 — Barium enema: multiple diverticulae
Figure 11.3 — Barium enema: multiple diverticulae, saw tooth
I- Conservative treatment: in NON-Complicated cases
1- Treatment of chronic constipation
2- High fiber diet
3- Antibiotics in acute diverticulitis without peritonitis or abcess will succeed in
more than 85 % of cases
Investigations of diverticulosis:
Treatment:
DIVERTICULOSIS OF THE COLON
148
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p152 | printed 149 | images 1 ===
I-Per-cutaneous drainage:
ultrasound or CT guided in localized small abcess with drainage catheter
left inside.
III- Surgical Treatment
Indications:
1- Diffuse peritonitis (signs & symptoms).
2- Failure of conservative treatment
3- Failure of percutaneous drainage of peri-colic abcess.
Types of surgery:
1- Hartmann” procedure:
1 st stage:
resection without anastomosis + end colostomy + closure of rectal stump •
2 nd stage:
colorectal anastomosis after 6 - 8 weeks
2-1 st stage:
resection + colo-rectal anastomosis + temporary ileostomy
2 nd stage:
closure of ileostomy.
Figure 11.4 — Hartmann procedure
DIVERTICULOSIS OF THE COLON
149
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p153 | printed 150 | images 1 ===
Figure 11.5 — Hartmann procedure (resection + temporary colostomy) Resection + colo-rectal
anastomosis + diverting ileostomy
DIVERTICULOSIS OF THE COLON
150
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p154 | printed 151 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 1 2
Appendix
12
151
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p155 | printed 152 | images 0 ===
Parts of appendix:
The appendix has a base, body and tip. The mesentery attached to the appendix
is known as mesoappendix.
The submucous coat of appendix contains lots of lymphoid follicles. The
presence of lymphoid follicles is one important etiological factor for
development of appendicitis.
The base of the appendix is usually located at the Mac-Burney’s point. The body
and the tip of the appendix may lie at different locations and hence named
according to the location.
The human appendix ranges from 2 to 20 cm.
The diameter of the appendix is usually between 7 and 8 mm.
The appendix is connected to the mesentery in the lower region of the ileum, by
a meso- appendix containing appendicular artery and vein
Where the base of appendix is located?
The base of the appendix is attached to the posteromedial wall of the cecum 2 cm
below the ileocecal junction.
If the taenia coli in the cecum are traced downwards all the three taenia coli
converges to the base of the appendix and continue as the longitudinal muscle
coat of the appendix.
On the skin, the base of the appendix lies at Mac-Burney’s point which is located
at the right spino-umbilical line (Line joining between the anterior superior iliac
spine and the umbilicus) at the junction of medial two-thirds and lateral one-
third.
What is meso-appendix ?
This is the mesentery of the appendix attached to the mesenteric border of the
appendix. • The mesoappendix contains the appendicular vessels.
The appendicular vessels stop just before the tip of the appendix.
The tip of the appendix is the least vascular area, and in obstructive type of
appendicitis the commonest site of gangrene is the tip of the appendix.
The appendix is supplied by appendicular artery which is a branch of inferior
division of ileo-colic artery. The appendicular artery is an end artery.
Sometimes an accessory appendicular artery may arise from the posterior cecal
artery and may supply the appendix in addition to appendicular artery.
The vein drains into the superior mesenteric vein (portal).
Why appendix is known as abdominal tonsil?
What are the different locations of appendix?
APPENDIX
152
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p156 | printed 153 | images 1 ===
Figure 12.1 — Positions of the appendix
Retrocecal (60–70%):
commonest location, lies behind the cecum.
Pelvic (20–30%):
Second commonest location lies towards the pelvis.
Paracecal (1–2%):
Lies along the side of the caecum.
Subcecal (1 %):
Lies below the cecum.
Ileal (1–2%):
Lies towards the terminal ileum. May be:
Ectopic appendix:
Due to mal-rotation of the gut, the appendix along with cecum may be
located in left iliac fossa or in the right sub-hepatic region.
Acute appendicits
Acute inflammation of the appendix
Pre-ileal: Runs infront of the terminal ileum
Post-ileal: Runs behind the terminal ileum.
APPENDIX
153
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p157 | printed 154 | images 0 ===
1- Appendicitis is caused by obstruction of the appendiceal lumen.
2- The most common causes of luminal obstruction include:
3- Bacterial infection:
The commonest organism is Escherichia coli.
Other organis: Include enterococci, bacteroides, anaerobic streptococci,
clostridia.
4- Dietary factors:
Low residue, high protein diet is associated with increased incidence of
acute appendicitis. This has been related to constipation because of such
diet.
A-Acute catarrhal appendicitis:
Obstruction causes an increase in pressure within the lumen due to
continuous secretion of fluids and mucus from the mucosa.
B-Mucocele of appendix:
A condition where appendix is swollen with mucoid secretion due to
occlusion of its lumen proximally.
C-Acute suppurative appendicitis:
If appendicular obstruction persists, Intra-luminal pressure rises. As a
consequence, appendicular wall ischemia begins, resulting in bacterial
invasion of the appendicular wall.
D-Gangrene and perforation:
due to thrombosis of the appendicular artery and Veins.
E- Appendicular abscess and peritonitis in neglected cases
N.B.
The mucocele may rupture and the epithelial cells may be implanted on the peritoneal surface with
formation of large mucoid mass. This condition is known as pseudo-myxoma peritonii.
Pathophysiology:
lymphoid hyperplasia secondary infections (more common during childhood
and in young adults), • Faecoliths, foreign bodies, worms, adhesions causing
kink of the appendix and neoplasms as carcinoid tumor or cancer cecum.
Pathological types:
Risk factors for perforation of acute appendicitis
Extremes of age.
APPENDIX
154
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p158 | printed 155 | images 0 ===
General symptoms:
1- Fever → low grade unless complicated by suppuration and peritonitis. 2-
Toxic look
Local symptoms:
1- Pain
General signs:
Local signs:
1- Localized tenderness, rebound tenderness and guarding rigidity:
2- Rovsing’s signs:
deep palpation in left iliac fossa elicit pain in right iliac fossa
3- Psoas sign:
pain in right iliac fossa on extension of the right hip due to nflammation of
peritoneum over psoas muscle
4- Obturator sign:
internal rotation of the flexed hip causing pain in right iliac fossa
5- Silent abdomen due to ileus.
Fecolith obstruction.
Diabetes mellitus.
Administration of purgative.
Immunosupressed patients—chronic renal failure, steroid
Clinical picture:
Often begins in the center of the abdomen, (peri-umbilical)
This pain is typically a dull, and poorly localized,
As the inflammation progresses, the pain begins to localize more clearly to the right iliac
fossa, as the peritoneum becomes inflamed .
Typically, point pain is not present until the parietal peritoneum is Inflamed. 2- Anorexia,
nausea and vomiting.
Fever – tachycardia
Toxic look
In the right iliac fossa mainly at Mc-Burney’s point (1/3 of the way along a line drawn
from the anterior superior iliac spine to the umbilicus).
APPENDIX
155
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p159 | printed 156 | images 1 ===
Figure 12.2 — Psoas and obturator signs
1. Acute appendicitis
2. Meckel’s diverticulitis
3. Right-sided disturbed ectopic pregnancy
4. Acute salpingitis
5. Twisted right ovarian cyst
6. Acute intestinal obstruction
7. Ileo-cecal tuberculosis
8. Acute Crohn’s ileitis
9. Perforated peptic ulcer
10. Ureteric colic
11. Acute pyelonephritis
12. Psoas abscess.
13. Cancer cecum
1- Appendicular mass
2- Appendicular abcess
3- Perforated appendix and generalized peritonitis 4- Portal pyemia and liver
abcess.
5- Septic shock
1. CBC: polymorphonuclear leukocytosis.
2. Urine analysis:
for suspected urinary causes as UTI → PYURIA
D.D. of pain in right iliac fossa
Complications of acute appendicitis:
Management of non-complicated acute appendicitis:
Investigations helpful for diagnosis of acute appendicitis:
APPENDIX
156
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p160 | printed 157 | images 0 ===
3. C-reactive protein may be elevated.
4. Ultrasonography—sensitivity of 86% for diagnosis of acute appendicitis and
exclude other causes as gynecological causes.
5. CT scan of abdomen—sensitivity of 94% for diagnosis of acute appendicitis
and exclude other causes.
6. In women of child-bearing age— beta-HCG to exclude ectopic pregnancy.
A.Initial treatment:
B. Emergency Appendicectomy:
5 % for every 12 hours passed.
Appendicular mass
It is an inflammatory mass composed of:
1- Edematous omentum,
2- ileal loops and cecum
3- Inflammed appendix.
Treatment:
Nothing by mouth.
Intravenous fluid: Ringer’s lactate and normal saline
Broad spectrum antibiotics—2nd generation cephalosporin and metronidazole.
The operation should preferably done within 24 hours of admission.
The risk of perforation increases with time.
After 36 hours the risk of perforation is up to 36% and the risk increases by
The procedure either done laparoscopically or by open technique.
Clinically
If the patient presents with classic features of acute appendicitis and then
presents with a lump in right iliac fossa, this is likely to be an appendicular
mass.
Detected as tender mass in the right iliac fossa with guarding rigidity.
Toxic look, high fever,…
How is the appendicular mass formed?
Appendicular lump is a conglomerate consisting of inflamed appendix,
adjacent terminal ileum, cecum and the greater omentum.
APPENDIX
157
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p161 | printed 158 | images 2 ===
Figure 12.3 — Appendicular mass(operative finding)
1- pelvi-abdominal ultrasound to exclude other causes ( adnexal mass):
it reveals inflammatory mass in the right iliac fossa+ pelvic fluid collections
2- CT SCAN abdomen and pelvis with contrast:
more valuable in diagnosis and differentiate between appendicular mass
and other pathologies
Figure 12.4 — Appendicular mass
How to investigate?
How to differentiate an appendicular mass and an abscess?
In a classical case the appendicular mass forms around the third day of acute
attack of pain and develops into an abscess around fifth to tenth day.
Pyrexia, aggravation of the local signs and a rising leukocyte count are
indicators of abscess formation.
Ultrasound and CT scan may demonstrate pus within an appendicular mass.
APPENDIX
158
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p162 | printed 159 | images 2 ===
Figure 12.5 — Appendicular collection: CT view
Figure 12.6 — CT appendicular abcess
(Ochsner-Sherren regimen) is the preferred treatment
Components of conservative treatment Ochsner’s Sherren regime:
For pain:
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or narcotic analgesics as Pethidine. •
For vomitting:
Stop oral fluids, and insert nasogastric tube for suction.
Fluid administration:
Intravenous fluids to maintain fluid electrolyte balance.
(Ringer’s and normal saline)
How do you plan management of appendicular mass?
If appendicular mass is palpable on admission: conservative treatment
Immediate appendicectomy is technically difficult.
There is increased chance of fecal fistula postoperatively due to bowel injury
Operation should be done if conservative treatment fails with persistent
picture.
APPENDIX
159
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p163 | printed 160 | images 0 ===
Control infection:
3rd generation cephalosporin along with metronidazole administered
parenterally.
Monitoring is the most important component of conservative treatment: •
Symptomatic improvement—pain, vomiting.
(4th– 5th day).
Management of a case of appendicular abscess
I- Resuscitation followed by drainage of abscess is the treatment of choice.
1. Intravenous fluids.
2. Nasogastric suction
3. Catheterization (for monitoring urine output)
4. Intravenous antibiotics—3RD generation cephalosporins+ Metronidazole.
II- Steps of drainage of appendicular abscess:
a) General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation.
b) A muscle cutting incision. Skin and external oblique incision like Mc-Burney’s
incision. But the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles are cut in
the same line of incision for better drainage.
c) The abscess wall is incised and abscess drained without opening the
peritoneum.
If patient is not vomiting—oral fluids may be administered.
Hourly monitoring of pulse, blood pressure and respiration.
Monitoring of temperature 4 hourly.
Tenderness in right iliac fossa
Progress of the mass (is to be marked)
If the patient responds well to conservative treatment: Lump may regress, pain
decreases, pulse and temperature normalizes → Continue antibiotics for 7–10
days - Allow oral fluid and then food when patient has the desire to eat
Complete disappearance of the mass takes 6–8 weeks.
Interval appendicectomy should be considered after 6–8 weeks.
If with the above regimen; the mass increasing in size, pain and tenderness
aggravating, rising pulse rate and fever with chills and rigor—this indicates
appendicular abscess formation and early intervention for drainage is
indicated.
The patient may show features of septicemia.
Formation of pus is confirmed by USG or CT scan.
APPENDIX
160
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p164 | printed 161 | images 1 ===
d) A tube drain is inserted through separate wound and the main wound is
closed in layers. e) if the appendix is accessible in the operative field it should be
removed.
Figure 12.7 — Management of appendicular mass
1. Parietal swelling:
2. Intra-abdominal swelling:
3. Retroperitoneal swelling:
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Important causes of mass in right iliac fossa:
Lipoma
Desmoid tumor
Appendicular lump.
Appendicular abscess.
Ileocecal tuberculosis.
Crohn’s ileitis.
Carcinoma cecum or ascending colon
Lymph node mass
. Adnexal mass
Hydronephrosis or tumor in an unascended or dropped kidney.
Retroperitoneal sarcoma.
Iliopsoas abscess.
Tumor in an undescended right testis.
APPENDIX
161
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p165 | printed 162 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 1 3
Intestinal obstruction
13
162
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p166 | printed 163 | images 0 ===
Any condition interferes with normal forwards passage of intestinal contents.
Cause of obstruction: mechanical or functional ( Ileus ).
Duration of obstruction: acute or chronic.
Degree of obstruction : partial or complete
Type of obstruction (complicated or not): (simple or strangulation) .
Mechanical obstruction
It means obstruction due to occlusion of the lumen of the bowel
According to the duration :
1- Acute (small intestine)
2- Chronic (colon)
Complicated or simple :
1- Simple →intact blood supply and wall of the intestine.
2- Closed loop as in volvulus = complicated
3- Strangulated (interfere with the blood supply) = complicated
4- Perforation = complicated
Important Facts:
Mechanical bowel obstruction:
A. Small bowel obstruction:
1. Adhesion 60% (postoperative – congenital)
2. Hernia 20% (femoral, inguinal H.)
3. Neoplasm 5%
Definition:
Classification:
Adhesion is the most common cause of intestinal obstruction
80 % of bowel obstruction is due to small bowel obstruction ; 20% colonic
obstruction • The most common causes of small bowel obstruction are
adhesions and hernias and less common neoplasms
Commonest causes of colon obstruction are Colo-Rectal cancer in 60-70% while
30% are diverticular disease, volvulus and others.
Mortality rate ranges between 3 % for simple bowel obstruction to 30% when
there is strangulation or perforation.
Etiology:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
163
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p167 | printed 164 | images 0 ===
4. Volvulus 5%.
5. Others: intussception, foreign bodies, gall stones
B. Large bowel obstruction :
1) Cancer colon 60 %.
2) Diverticular disease 15 %.
3) Volvulus (sigmoid or cecum) 15 %.
4) Others: hernia –fecal impaction – inflammatory strictures.
Functional bowel obstruction:
Adynamic ileus = Paralytic ileus
1. Postoperative mostly after abdominal surgery is the most common cause
2. Metabolic causes: DKA - hyponateremia - hypokalemia
3. Intra-abdominal inflammation—sepsis → peritonitis
4. Retroperitoneal hematoma
5. Mesenteric vascular occlusion
6. Fracture spine
7. Uremia.
8. Drugs: morphine - anticonvulsant.
1. Colicky abdominal pain (due to contraction of the proximal intestinal
segment against the obstruction)
2. Vomiting
3. Distension due to proximal loop dilatation
4. Absolute constipation in complete obstruction.
5. History of previous abdominal operation (Adhesions) in adhesive I.O. 6. Red
currant jelly stool in intussception
7. Symptoms of associated cancers (in colonic obstruction) in obstructed
carcinoma.
Clinical picture of mechanical obstruction
Symptoms:
Pain is central abdominal
Pain occurs in attacks few minutes in between
Pain gradually increasing in severity
Common in proximal intestinal obstruction and late in colonic obstruction
The colour of vomitus is whitish in gastric obstruction, greenish in upper
intestinal obstruction and brownish or feculent in colonic obstruction.
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
164
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p168 | printed 165 | images 0 ===
8. History of tender swelling in anatomical site of hernia (Femoral- inguinal) in
obstructed hernia.
General Signs:
1. Signs of dehydration in prolonged cases (dry tongue, sunken eyes)
2. Fever, tachycardia, toxic look in cases complicated with strangulation and
peritonitis.
Local signs:
1- Inspection:
2- Palpation:
3- Percussion:
hyper-resonance
4- Auscultation:
5- P/R:
empty rectum
Laboratory:
1- Serum electrolytes (Na & K) decreased
2- Renal function: impaired in neglected cases (pre-renal failure).
3- CBC → Leucocytosis in strangulations or perforations and peritonitis
Radiology:
1- Plain X-Ray abdomen erect and supine
Scars of previous operation
Hernia swelling
Abdominal distension
Examine for hernias
Tenderness, rebound tenderness and rigidity in cases of complicated peritonitis.
Palpable mass in obstructed carcinoma
Exaggerated intestinal sounds (mechanical obstruction)
Silent in associated peritonitis
Investigations:
Supine → dilated loops: detect the level of obstruction
Concertina effect (jejunal)
Featureless tubes (ileum)
Haustrations (colon)
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
165
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p169 | printed 166 | images 1 ===
• Air under diaphragm in perforated viscus (closed loop obstruction or strangulation)
2 - Computed tomography
Figure 13.1 — Plain abdominal radiograph in obstruction
Erect →
Multiple air and fluid levels
Used to detect obstruction, strangulation and fluid collection following
perforation and peritonitisAccuracy 94% in diagnosis of obstruction
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
166
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p170 | printed 167 | images 1 ===
Figure 13.2 — Plain x-ray Supine and erect films
I- Conservative treatment
1- All cases with adhesive intestinal obstruction
2- Preoperative preparation
1- Evidence of peritonitis or strangulation
2- Obstructing carcinoma
3- Obstructed hernia
Lines of treatment:
I.Conservative treatment:
This treatment continues for 48 hour
1- Intravenous fluids administration to correct dehydration (Ringer solution)
and protect the kidneys
2 - Naso-gastric tube:
Treatment of mechanical intestinal obstruction (adhesive)
Indications:
Contraindications:
Suction of the fluids from the proximal segment
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
167
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p171 | printed 168 | images 0 ===
3- Antibiotics mainly against gram - ve and anaerobes (3rd Generation
Cephalosporin and Metronidazole I.V.)
4- Urinary catheter to monitor urine output
Indications for surgery in obstruction:
1. Failure of conservative treatment 48 hours
2. Development of peritonitis
3. Proved or suspected strangulation
4. Obstructed hernia
5. Obstructed cancer
6. Gut perforation
7. Closed loop obstruction
Types of surgical procedures:
1- In adhesive intestinal obstruction →Exploration and adhesiolysis
(1 st stage) and Closure of colostomy (2nd stage)
2-Obstruction with specific causes:
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
Decreases the distension
Decreases the colicky pain
Gives an idea about the level of obstruction through the colour of aspirate
Explration of the intestine from the duodeno-jejunal flexure till ileo-cecal
junction
The adhesive band is identified and divided.
The band is identified at the junction of the dilated proximal segment and
narrow collapsed distal segment.
In cases of strangulation, or gut perforation → proceed for resection and
anastomosis in case of small bowel, right and transverse colon
In case of perforation of left colon → resection and temporary colostomy
Obstructed hernia →exploration of the hernia content
If viable return inside the abdomen and repair of the hernia
If non-viable resection and anastomosis and repair of the hernia
Obstructed carcinoma of colon →look cancer colon
Intussception
Volvulus of the sigmoid colon
Hirschsprung disease
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
168
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p172 | printed 169 | images 0 ===
Intussuception
1- ileo-cecal →the commonest
2- ileo-ileal
3- colo-colic
1. The entering = invaginating loop = Intussusceptum
2. The outer = recipient loop = Intussusceptient
A condition in which part of the intestine slides into an adjacent part of the
intestine • Intussusception is the most common cause of intestinal obstruction in
children younger than 3 years.
Types:
Etiology and Pathophysiology:
The etiology is unknown in children, sometimes hypertrophied lymphoid
tissue in the intestinal submucosa initiate the process
In adults it might be due to tumor in the intestine
Parts of the Intussusception:
The intussusceptum proceed along the lumen of the intussuscipient from
proximal to distal.
The mesentery of the intussusceptum is invaginated with the intestine, leading
to bowel obstruction.
Compression of the vessels in the mesentery leading to bowel ischemia
The intestinal mucosa sloughs and ulcerate due to ischemia, leading to bleeding
and “currant jelly stool” (a mixture of sloughed mucosa, blood, and mucus).
Neglected cases leads to gangrene and perforation at the head of Intussusceptum
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
169
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p173 | printed 170 | images 1 ===
Figure 13.3 — Intussusception
Symptoms
1- The patient with intussusception is usually an infant,
2- Has an upper respiratory infection
3- Vomiting: Initially, vomiting is non-bilious, but when the intestinal
obstruction occurs, vomiting becomes bilious
4- Abdominal pain: colicky, severe, and intermittent
5- Passage of blood and mucus: Parents notice the stools like currant jelly. (This
is a mixture of mucus, sloughed mucosa, and blood.).
6- Palpable abdominal mass
Signs:
1- Signs of dehydration in neglected cases + fever in case of peritonitis
2- Abdominal distension
3- Right hypochondrium sausage-shaped mass and empty right iliac fossa
Clinical picture:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
170
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p174 | printed 171 | images 1 ===
(Dance sign)
4- Tenderness, rebound tenderness and rigidity: If intestinal gangrene and
peritonitis occur
Lab. : CBC → Leucocytosis in strangulation or perforation
Rad.:
1- Plain x-ray abdomen erect and supine
Dilated proximal intestinal loops and air/fluid level
2 - Ultrasound:
a) Reveal intestinal obstruction caused by intussusception.
b) Target sign : Typically show a “bu ll’s - eye,” representing the intestine coiled
within intestine.
3 - Barium enema Claw sign
→
.
Figure 13.4 — Claw sign
A - Initial treatment: as in adhesive I.O.
1- Intravenous fluids to correct dehydration
2- Nasogastric tube for suction
3- Start antibiotic therapy
B - Hydrostatic reduction using barium enemas succeed in many cases
→
Indications: All early and uncomplicated cases (no signs of peritonitis and or
strangulation)
Investigations:
Treatment:
Success known by passage of the contrast to the ileum
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
171
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p175 | printed 172 | images 1 ===
C - Surgery
1- When hydroststic reduction fails
2- Presence of complications as peritonitis or gut perforation.
Procedures:
1- In non-complicated cases: manual reduction of the intussuception by
compression not pulling to avoid tearing of the mesentry
2- In case of perforation or gangrene → resection and anastomosis:
In ileocecal intussuception : right hemicolectomy and ileo-transverse
anastomosis
Figure 13.5 — Manual reduction of the intussception
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..
Colo nic Volvulus
1- Sigmoid volvulus (most common = longer mesentery)
2- Caecal volvulus. (less common)
1. The presence of a long mesentery with a narrow base of fixation to the
retroperitoneum 2. Elongated, redundant colon predisposes to the formation
of volvulus.
The term volvulus = twist
A colonic volvulus occurs when a part of the colon twists on its mesentery,
resulting in acute, sub-acute, or chronic colonic obstruction.
Types of colonic volvulus:
Etiology of Sigmoid volvulus:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
172
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p176 | printed 173 | images 2 ===
3. Chronic constipation → loaded sigmoid → elongation → twist along its
mesentery
4. Old age → colonic hypotonia → chronic constipation → increases intra-luminal
pressure.
5. Postoperative adhesions
6. Intestinal malrotations
7. Pelvic tumors
8. Mega-colon
Figure 13.6 — Etiology of volvulus
Symptoms :
1- History of chronic constipation
2- Colicky abdominal pains – constant severe abdominal pain indicates closed
loop obstruction and impending perforation
3- Progressive abdominal distension
4- Progressive to absolute constipation
5- Late vomiting
Pathophysiology:
The presence of long mesentry, narrow attachment and elongated loaded colon → anti-
clockwise rotation of the sigmoid along its mesentry → occlusion of the lumen →
obstruction
Occlusion of the blood vessels → ischemia, gangrene and perforation
Clinical picture:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
173
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p177 | printed 174 | images 1 ===
Signs:
1- Fever, tachycardia and toxic look in cases with peritonitis
2- Massive abdominal distension
3- Tenderness, rigidity and rebound tenderness in associated peroration and
peritonitis
4- Percussion → tympanitic resonance
5- P/R → empty rectum
A- Lab. → CBC for leukocytosis in peritonitis
B- Rad.
1- Plain X-Ray abdomen → huge distended sigmoid colon filling most of the
abdomen
(omega sign = coffee bean sign)
2- Barium enema → “Birds beak”
Figure 13.7 — Contrast study in sigmoid volvulus
Investigations :
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
174
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p178 | printed 175 | images 1 ===
Figure 13.8 — Sigmoid volvulus (omega sign)
3- Abdominal ultra-sound → Abdominal collection in perforation
1 - Sigmoidoscopic de - tortion :
clock-wise and decompression and placing rectal tube succeeds in most cases
2- Surgery:
1 st stage:
Resection and colostomy
2 nd stage:
Closure of colostomy
Treatment Sigmoid Volvulus
First choice initial treatment in uncomplicated cases
Contraindicated in suspected perforation
● Elective: Resection of redundant colon and re-anastomosis after colonic
preparation
● Urgent: in case of gangrene or colon perforation: Hartmann’ procedure
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
175
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p179 | printed 176 | images 1 ===
Figure 13.9 — Hartmann’s procedure
Hirschsprung Disease = Congenital megacolon
Hirschsprung disease is a congenital disorder characterized by the absence of
ganglia in the distal colon, resulting in a functional obstruction
genetic predisposition
The muscle layer
1. Proximal dilated colon = normal
Etiology :
Pathophysiology:
The wall of the colon contains 2 enteric plexus
Meisener plexus in the submucosa and Auerbach plexus in
Both causing colonic wall relaxation
The wall of the colon supplied by parasympathetic and sympathetic
Parasympathetic is predominant and causes wall contraction
In Hirschsprung Disease: the ganglion cells in the meisener and Auerbach’s
plexus are absent (aganglionic segment)
So there is predominat action of the parasympathetic nerves leading to spasm in
the segment of the colon affected → functional obstruction
Parts of the colon
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
176
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p180 | printed 177 | images 2 ===
2. Transition zone = hypo-ganglionic
3. Distal zone = spastic aganglionic
Figure 13.10 — Hirschsprung disease: bowel segments
Figure 13.11 — Hirschsprung disease: transition zone
Sites:
H.D usually starts in the rectum → sigmoid → and proceeds proximally to
involve variable parts of the colon
Most cases of Hirschsprung disease are diagnosed in the newborn that fails to
pass meconium within 24-48 hours of birth.
Abdominal distension
Vomiting
Poor nutrition and failure to gain weight
Older infants and children typically present with chronic constipation poorly
responds to laxatives and distension
Hirschsprung enterocolitis : it is a severe form of entero-colitis:
1. Bloody diarrhea- foul smelling
Male is affected more than females (4: 1)
Clinical presentation:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
177
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p181 | printed 178 | images 1 ===
2. Abdominal pain
3. Fever
4. Vomiting
5. Fatal if untreate
On examination:
1. Marked abdominal distension
2. Tympanitic resonance
3. Increased intestinal sounds
4. P/R: reveals an empty rectum and may result in gush of stool upon withdrawal
of the finger.
A- Lab. 1- CBC → anemia and infection
2- Serum electrolytes (Na and K)
B - Rad. : Plain X - Ray abdomen erect and supine dilated left colon &
→
No rectal gas
1-Barium enema:
Shows narrow distal segment, funnel-shaped dilatation at level of
transition zone with marked dilatation of the proximal colon.
Figure 13.12 — Barium enemaCongenital mega-colon
3- Rectal biopsy:
Rectal biopsy is the best diagnostic test and demonstrates absence of
ganglion cells (done through endoscopy).,
Investigations
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
178
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p182 | printed 179 | images 1 ===
4- Electro-manometry:
The classic finding is the absence of the recto-anal inhibitory reflex when
the rectum is distended.. (Transient involuntary relaxation of the internal
anal sphincter in response to distention of the rectum help to discriminate
between the gas, fluid and stool at anal canal)
Manegement of HD differs according to the presentation:
1- If the patient presents with acute intestinal obstruction in the early life the
management will be:
Resuscitation , IVF
Naso-Gastric Tube
Antibiotics
The initial surgery requires performing a temporary colostomy
2- Definitive procedures = pull through operation
Figure 13.13 — Pull-through operation
…
Imperforate anus
1- The lowest part of the hindgut (cloaca) is divided by uro-rectal septum into:
A- Anorectal canal → posteiorly
Management:
Resection of aganglionic segment and anastomosing the two normal ganglionic
ends. They give excellent result in 90%.
Swenson. The aganglionic segment is resected down to the sigmoid colon and
rectum, and anastomosis is performed between the normal colon and the low
rectum.
Embryology of the rectum and anal canal:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
179
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p183 | printed 180 | images 0 ===
B- Uro-genital sinus → anteriorly
2- This Ano-rectal canal will form the rectum and upper ½ of anal canal
3- The anus and lower ½ of anal canal develop by an external invagination from
skin, known as the proctodeum, which deepens toward the upper part of anal
canal to join it but remains separated from it by the anal membrane. This
membrane should disintegrate at 8 weeks' gestation.
The causes of Imperforate anus are unknown
Classifications: in relationship to the level of the pubo-rectalis portion of the
levator ani muscles
I Low anomaly :
Ano - rectal canal descends below the pubo - rectalis muscle a- Covered anus
b- Ectopic anus (perineum- low vaginal fistula) c- Anal stenosis
II - High anomaly :
The ano-rectal canal ends above pubo-rectalis muscle with or without
fistulae formation a- Ano-Rectal agenesis + recto vaginal, or recto-vesical
fistula
b- Ano-Rectal agenesis (atresia) → the rectum is blind ended above pubo-rectalis
with no fistula formation.
The term imperforate anus is clinical term: it means that the anus is not
evident in its normal position at birth
I low anomaly:
a- The anus is missing or stenotic b- Failure to pass meconium after birth
(picture of intestinal obstruction). c- Meconium evident at the perineum → a
recto-perineal fistula = (Ectopic anus)
d- Meconium bulge at skin at site of anus → covered anus e- If meconium is in the
urine, the diagnosis of a recto-urethral fistula f- Anal dimple and median raphe
usually present.
Clinical presentation:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
180
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p184 | printed 181 | images 2 ===
Figure 13.14 — Rectovestibular fistula
Rectovestibular fistula
Figure 13.15 — Perineal fistula
Perineal fistula
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
181
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p185 | printed 182 | images 2 ===
Figure 13.16 — Covered anus
Covered anus
II- High anomaly:
a- The anus is missing b- Failure to pass meconium after birth (picture of
intestinal obstruction) c- No Meconium evident at the perineum d-
Meconium in urine → high recto- vesical fistula e- Recto-vaginal fistula →
meconium comes out of the vagina. f- No anal dimple & No median raphe
Figure 13.17 — Normal male anatomy
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
182
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p186 | printed 183 | images 4 ===
Figure 13.18 — Low anorectal anomaly
Figure 13.19 — Low anorectal anomaly
Low anomaly
Figure 13.20 — Agenesis with fistula
Figure 13.21 — Rectal atresia with no fistula
High anomaly
agenesis with fistula Rectal atresia with no fistula
1. Invertogram:
Investigations:
Holding the baby upside down,
a lateral plain x-ray is performed to observe the distance between the level of gas
in the distal rectum and a metal piece placed over the expected anus.
And the relation of recta gas to PC line (pubo-coccygeal line).
If the rectal Gas is below the P.C line or < 2.5 cm from the skin →it is low anomaly
If the rectal gas ends above the P.C. line or > 2.5 cm from the skin → it is high
anomaly
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
183
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p187 | printed 184 | images 2 ===
2. C.T scan invertography: better evaluating tool
Figure 13.22 — Invertogram
Low anomaly
Figure 13.23 — Distal rectal gas level
High anomaly
Treatment:
Colostomy for cases presented with intestinal obstruction
Ano-plasty
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
184
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p188 | printed 185 | images 0 ===
Mesenteric vascular occlusion
It is a syndrome caused by inadequate blood flow through the mesenteric
vessels, resulting in ischemia and gangrene of the bowel wall.
A- Mesentric Arterial ischemia
B- Mesentric Venous thrombosis
Acute mesenteric arterial embolism = 50 %
B- Mesentric Venous thrombosis = 10 %
Types:
Mural thrombus after myocardial infarction, • Atrial thrombus associated with
mitral stenosis and atrial fibrillation
Septic emboli from infective endocarditis
Emboli from fragments of proximal aortic thrombus (30 %)
Hypercoagulability
Venous congestion from cirrhosis (portal hypertension)
Infection
Pathophysiology:
S.M. Vessels are more frequently involved than the I.M. vessels (larger diameter
and better collaterals with inferior vessels).
Mucosal sloughing may cause bleeding into the GIT
If ischemia persists disruption of mucosal barrier occurs and bacteria, toxins,
and vasoactive substances are released into the systemic circulation
Damage may range from ischemia to necrosis, gangrene and perforation
Bowel necrosis occurs in 8-12 hours from onset of symptoms
High mortality up to 90 %
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
185
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p189 | printed 186 | images 2 ===
Figure 13.24 — Mesenteric arterial occlusion
Figure 13.25 — Mesenteric venous occlusion
SM Venous occlusion SMA occlusion
Clinical presentation:
History of cardiac disease (AF – Mitral stenosis)
Usually old age
The most important finding is pain that is disproportionate to physical
examination findings.
Typically, pain is severe, and diffuse not responding to Opioid
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea at first followed by constipation
Abdominal distention
Gastrointestinal bleeding
As the bowel becomes gangrenous, rectal bleeding and sign of sepsis
(tachycardia, hypotension, fever)
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
186
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p190 | printed 187 | images 1 ===
Abdominal examination:
In early cases no specific findings present although the severe abdominal
pain
In cases complicated with gangrene and peritonitis → tenderness, rebound,
rigidity distension and silent abdomen
Bowel gangrene and peritonitis
I- Lab :
CBC – Serum electrolyte (Na & K) - Renal functions
II-Radiology:
A- Plain X-Ray abdomen erect and supine
1- Dilated intestinal loops + air and fluid levels
2- Air under diaphragm in perforation
B- C.T. or MRI angiography:
detect occluded mesenteric vessels and edematus bowel loops
Figure 13.26 — Thickened edematous bowel loops
Complications of MVO:
septic shock
Investigations:
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
187
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p191 | printed 188 | images 1 ===
Figure 13.27 — Occlusion of the distal SMA
C- Duplex scan on mesenteric vessels
D- ECG: detect the cause as AF.
I- Initial treatment:
1- Intra-venous fluids
2- Naso-gastric tube and urinary catheter
3- Antibiotics
II- Surgery: time factor is very important
1- Exploration and mesenteric embolectomy (in acute embolism)
2- Assess bowel viability: in ischemic, gangrenous cases → Resection
anastomosis according to extentof ischemic bowel. Extensive resection may
lead to short bowel syndrome
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….
Treatment
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
188
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p192 | printed 189 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 1 4
Polyposis of Colon
14
189
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p193 | printed 190 | images 0 ===
Polyp is a tissue growth protruding from the mucous membrane into the
lumen of the gastrointestinal tract.
Types of colonic polyps
A. Benign non-neoplastic polyp:
B. Benign neoplastic polyp:
Familial Polyposis Coli (F P C)
Tubular adenoma:
commonest type. Either pedunculated or sessile.
Villous adenoma:
These are usually sessile and has a velvety surface and there are finger like
processes on the surface
Tubulo-villous adenoma:
characteristics in-between the tubular and villous adenoma.
What is a polyp?
Juvenile polyps
Peutz Jegher’s syndrome
Inflammatory polyp
Hyperplastic polyp.
Adenomatous polyp
Familial adenmatous polypsis = Familial Polyposis Coli
Gardner’s syndrome
This is an inherited disorder transmitted by autosomal dominant genes
There are more than 100 polyps in the colon or any number of polyps in patients
with family history of familial adenomatous polyposis
It appears in second decade of life but may appear earlier
If left untreated the chance of malignant transformation is 100%
The mean age of cancer diagnosis is around 40 years
These are adenomatous polyps.
Types of adenomatous polyps:
POLYPOSIS OF COLON
190
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p194 | printed 191 | images 1 ===
1. Asymptomatic ; discovered on routine screening of a family with a known
patient with familial polyposis coli
2. Bleeding per rectum.
3. Lower abdominal pain.
4. Mucus discharge.
5. Diarrhea.
Familial polyposis coli with some extra-colonic manifestation.
a) Osteomas, epidermoid cyst and congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment
epithelium.
b) Polyps of stomach and small intestine.
c) Retroperitoneal fibrosis and desmoid tumor
1.Colonoscopy:
Figure 14.1 — Colonoscopy in familial polyposis
Clinical presentation:
What is Gardner’s syndrome?
Investigations of F P C:
is the most valuable investigation with biopsy to confirm the diagnosis and
detect malignant changes in any suspicious polyp
The disease involves the colon, rectum and anal canal with innumerable polyps
within the lumen.
The intervening mucosa appears normal. The serosal surface of the colon is also
normal. • Screen family members of patients with familial polypsis coli at the
age of 10 years, clinically and with colonoscopy.
Colonoscopy should be done yearly till the age of 20 years as most of the patients
develop these polyps by the age of 20 years.
If there are no polyps at the age of 20 years, 2 yearly colonoscopy is to be done till
the age of 40 years.
POLYPOSIS OF COLON
191
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p195 | printed 192 | images 1 ===
2. Barium enema:
shows multiple small filling defects
Figure 14.2 — Familial polyposis coli in contrast study
Surgery is mandatory for these patients as there is 100% chance of malignant
transformation.
Options for surgical treatment:
1. Total proctocolectomy with ileostomy. Patient has a permanent ileostomy.
2. Total colectomy with excision of rectal polyps and ileo-rectal anastomosis.
Needs regular follow up as the rectum is retained.
3. Proctocolectomy with ileo-anal anastomosis with an ileal pouch reservoir.
N.B. Peutz Jegher’s syndrome
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………
Management of familial adenomatous polyposis coli:
Transmitted by autosomal dominant gene
Gastrointestinal polyposis with pigmentation of oral mucous membrane or
pigmentation in perianal region
Polyps may be present in the whole gastrointestinal tract
These are hamartomatous polyps
Onset of symptoms is usually around the age of 10–30 years
Patient may present with GI bleeding, intestinal obstruction due to
intussusception
POLYPOSIS OF COLON
192
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p196 | printed 193 | images 3 ===
Colon and rectum
Figure 14.3 — Dimensions of the colon
Figure 14.4 — Anatomy of the colon
Diameters of different parts
Figure 14.5 — Blood supply of the right colon
POLYPOSIS OF COLON
193
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p197 | printed 194 | images 1 ===
Figure 14.6 — Arterial supply of the left colon
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………
POLYPOSIS OF COLON
194
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p198 | printed 195 | images 0 ===
C H A P T E R 1 5
Colorectal Cancer
15
195
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p199 | printed 196 | images 0 ===
Pathology of colorectal carcinoma
Age:
old age , however no age is immune
Sex :
more common in males than females
2- Precancerous lesions:
Autosomal Dominant – 100 % turn malignant.
3- Microscopic picture:
Adenocarcinoma : More than 90% of colorectal carcinomas are
adenocarcinomas originating from epithelial cells of the colorectal mucosa
a) Grade 1: Well differentiated carcinoma
b) Grade 2: Moderate differentiated (most common) c) Grade 3: Undifferentiated
(poor prognosis)
Aetiology:
1- Predisposing factors:
Personal history of colorectal polyps or previous cancer
Colo-rectal cancer family history
Red meat, processed meat, fatty meals
Obesity
Smoking
Alcohol
FPC : (familial polyposis of colon)
Inflammatory bowel disease (UC > Chron’s)
Adenomatous polyp.
Mucinous adenocarcinoma (>50% mucinous material) ia a variant of
adenocarcinoma • According to the glandular contents :
Macroscopic picture: Naked eye:
Cauliflower mass → with ulcerating bleeding surface
Malignant ulcer → raised everted edge, hard base and necrotic floor
Malignant stricture: hard and irregular
COLORECTAL CANCER
196
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM


=== PDF p200 | printed 197 | images 2 ===
Figure 15.1 — Macroscopic appearances of colorectal cancer
Figure 15.2 — Distribution of colorectal cancer
The most common site incidence is rectosigmoid part of the colon
A- Direct: - mucosa → submucosa → muscle layer → serosa → nearby structures
or Organs. It may lead to internal fistula as colo-vesical or recto-vaginal
fisualae.
Rectum:
to urinary bladder, vagina → causing fistula →to sacrum, prostate, seminal
vesicles, and peritoneum.
B- Lymphatic spread:
1- Epicolic lymph nodes
2- Para-colic lymph nodes
Multicentricity is common
Incidence of colorectal cancer in different parts:
Spread:
Right colon → right ureter, abdominal wall, gonadal vessels, duodenum, small
intestine, peritoneum, liver.
Transverse colon → duodenum, stomach, liver, intestine, peritoneum.
Left colon → spleen, abdominal wall, intestine, left ureter, gonadal vessels,
peritoneum.
COLORECTAL CANCER
197
YMNOTES MEDICAL · DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
